Ent_HNW_NRG_Col_Bleed_NoMask_CMYK

Royal Bank of Canada
Annual Report 2022

Table of contents

CEO Letter 

Chair Letter 

2022 Highlights 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Enhanced Disclosure Task Force 

Recommendations Index 

Reports and Consolidated 

Financial Statements 

Ten-Year Statistical Review 

Shareholder Information 

4

8

10

20

128

129

230

232

About the cover 
Participants at the starting gate of the Kids’ Mile as part of the RBC Race for the 
Kids event held in Hyde Park, Chicago, U.S. on October 16, 2022. The event raised 
close to US$300,000 to support pediatric research at the University of Chicago 
Medicine Comer Children’s Hospital. To learn more about how we are helping 
communities prosper across the regions where we live and work, please refer  
to pages 14 and 15 of this report. (Photo/Jason Smith)

Connect with us

   facebook.com/rbc
   instagram.com/rbc

   twitter.com/@rbc
   youtube.com/user/RBC

   linkedin.com/company/rbc
  tiktok.com/@rbc

For more information on how we are leading with Purpose in creating differentiated value for our 
clients, communities, employees and shareholders, please visit RBC Stories.

Our Purpose

Helping clients thrive and  
communities prosper

Guided by our Vision to be among the world’s most trusted and 
successful financial institutions, and driven by our Purpose,  
we aim to be:

 

 

 

In Canada: the undisputed leader in financial services

 In the United States: the preferred partner to corporate, 
institutional and high net worth clients and their businesses 

 In select global financial centres: a leading financial services 
partner valued for our expertise

We are guided by our Values:

   Client First

   Collaboration

   Accountability

   Diversity & Inclusion

   Integrity

Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022  |  1

Who we are

By the numbers

17 million
clients

95,000+
employees

29
countries

2  |  Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022

Royal Bank of Canada is a global financial institution with a purpose-driven, principles-led approach to delivering leading performance.  Our success comes from the 95,000+ employees who leverage their imaginations and insights to bring our vision, values and strategy to life so we can help our clients thrive and communities prosper. As Canada’s biggest bank and one of the largest in the world, based on market capitalization, we have a diversified business model with a focus on innovation and providing exceptional experiences to our 17 million clients  in Canada, the U.S. and 27 other countries.This report showcases our 2022 results and the many stories that defined our year, including  how we’re performing against our balanced scorecard and the strong industry and client recognition awarded to our products, services, brand and people.Why invest?

(1)   Based on our 80.25 average percentile ranking compiled from our four top-tier ESG rankings and ratings; refer to page 19 of the 2022 Annual Report  

for additional information

Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022  |  3

   Diversified business model with scale and market-leading franchises that provide a full suite of products, advice and services for clients    Market-leading presence in Canada and an established multi-platform U.S. strategy with  a long runway for premium growth   Differentiated technology and innovation investments that go beyond banking   Premium ROE and disciplined expense management   Strong balance sheet and prudent risk management   Leading Canadian core deposit franchise that serves as a stable source of funding   Well-positioned to benefit from evolving macro environment   Strong performance in ESG rankings and ratings(1)Fellow shareholders,
I’m writing this letter as we all continue to live through a 
period of historic economic and societal change. 

Many of our clients and communities are anxious about 
the future, including the effects of rising inflation, higher 
interest rates and volatile markets. The onset of a tragic 
and senseless war in Ukraine has intensified post-pandemic 
economic challenges while also contributing to supply 
chain disruptions and global energy market turmoil. Against 
this backdrop, our communities continue to grapple with 
combating climate change – arguably the most complex 
challenge of all – and shifting toward a more inclusive and 
sustainable net-zero future.

In these uncertain times, one thing is clear to me: the 
leadership, stability and guidance that RBC can bring to our 
clients and communities is more important than ever.

The future is bright for RBC. Much of my optimism comes 
from working alongside tens of thousands of passionate, 
imaginative and inspirational RBC colleagues who bring 
support and new ideas to our stakeholders every single day. 
These ideas are more than advice and can come in many 
shapes and sizes – from big ideas that can change whole 
industries to in-the-moment ideas that make things easier 
for a young person starting their career or a growing family.

As I’ve expressed in the past, our bank’s 
prosperity rests on the strength and 
stability of our 17 million clients and the 
communities where they raise families, 
build businesses and live their lives.

In these challenging times, our colleagues take seriously 
the responsibility of helping clients navigate risks and 
opportunities to make the best decisions possible for them. 
They bring that same dedication to helping build and grow 
sustainable, vibrant and inclusive communities.

It is a true privilege to work alongside my colleagues, and 
this report shares many examples of how Team RBC is 
helping make progress possible for people, places and 
projects that matter to our collective future.

An all-weather bank with our sights set on growth
We aspire to be one of the most highly valued and most 
respected financial institutions in the world. 

On that journey, I’m pleased to share that we ended the 
fiscal year as a top-10 global bank by market capitalization 
and the highest valued bank on a Price-to-Book Ratio among 
global banks(1). We’ve also been recognized yet again as  
the most valuable brand in Canada and second among all 
global banks. 

In 2022, we generated earnings of $15.8 billion and an ROE 
of 16.4 per cent, and we delivered $6.9 billion in dividends to 
our common shareholders while buying back $5.4 billion in 
common shares. 

A message  
from

Dave 
McKay 

President and CEO

4  |  Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022

(1)   Banks with over $850 billion in loans

Our financial performance demonstrates how we continue 
to build long-term client franchises and deliver a premium 
return on equity, even as we transform RBC for the future 
and pursue targeted growth strategies in Canada, the 
U.S., the U.K. and Europe. This has been one of the most 
challenging operating environments in decades, but our size, 
scale, strong and prudent risk and capital management, and 
diversified business mix put us in a position of strategic and 
financial strength.

In short, we’re an all-weather bank 
that’s not only built to perform through 
the economic cycle, but also pursue 
big opportunities to grow where others 
simply can’t.

In Canada, we are the leading bank with deep and trusted 
client relationships across our franchises. We have #1 or 
#2 in market share in all key product categories, supported 
by the largest retail network in the country. This year, we 
partnered with ICICI Bank Canada to create a seamless 
banking experience for newcomers. We also prioritized 
building more engaging digital experiences that clients truly 
value. We’ve received industry recognition numerous times 
this year, including ranking highest in mobile banking client 
satisfaction by J.D. Power.

In the U.S., our second home market, we’re continuing to win 
and have a long runway for premium growth through our 
differentiated strategy to serve corporate, institutional and 
high-net-worth clients and their businesses. As a top-10 capital 
markets business in the U.S., we continue to deliver notable 
wins in corporate and investment banking and global 
markets. At City National, we kept our focus on organically 
growing the core banking business and enhancing our 
risk resilience. As the 6th largest wealth manager in the 
country(2), our U.S. Wealth Management business continues 
to add more products and talent to support our growing 
client base.

In the U.K. and Europe, steady and consistent growth has led 
us to build a trusted and competitive franchise that’s just 
getting started. With the acquisition of Brewin Dolphin, we’re 
now one of the largest wealth managers in the U.K., Ireland 
and Channel Islands, and are able to leverage our global 
capabilities for clients. We have big ambitions for targeted 
growth in these regions, with plans to continue leading with 
advice and recruiting top talent.

Across all these key regions, we’ve 
spent years building our core deposit 
franchises – both on the consumer side 
and the business side.

Deposits are the long-term lifeblood of any bank, giving it 
the ability to fund loans and growth. Our focus and scale in 
this area has given us a significant advantage against our 
peers, which we’ll continue to prioritize in the years ahead.

This report showcases our 2022 results and the many stories 
that defined our year, including how we’re performing 
against our balanced scorecard and the strong industry and 
client recognition awarded to our products, services, brand 
and people. I’m proud of these highlights and encourage 
you to read them for a deeper understanding of what we 
accomplished this year.

Despite our recent success, we are not content to coast on 
our brand and size. We’re striving to be even better. Here are 
just a few things I’m most excited about heading into 2023:

(2) U.S. wealth advisory firms quarterly earnings releases (10-Q)

Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022  |  5

100 Bishopsgate – RBC’s London, U.K. headquartersCity National Bank – New York City, U.S.Dave McKay addresses an all-employee town hall, October 18, 2022

More digitally-backed, client-centric experiences  
in banking – and beyond
We have a bold ambition to grow our market-leading 
franchises, add clients and serve them more deeply. To 
do that, we’re investing in building the best and most 
personalized client experiences possible. 

We will continue to challenge the status quo and rethink the 
experiences we deliver to engage with our clients in newer, 
smarter and simpler ways. We’re always on the lookout for 
the next great idea. That means more innovative products, 
insightful advice backed by the power of data and the creativity 
of our people, and leading partnerships that add more value.

This is especially critical amidst the generational changes 
in the way people live and work, including what they expect 
from a bank.

Our RBCx™ division shows how we’re doing things differently. 
This team is supporting 4,000+ tech and innovation clients of 
all sizes and also redefining what a bank can do through in-
house ventures like Ownr®, Mydoh® and Dr. Bill® – services that 
collectively reach hundreds of thousands of people who are 
looking to pursue big ambitions or just make life a little easier.

We’re innovating across all our businesses, including in 
Capital Markets with our AI-based Aiden® trading platform; 
P&CB with our Vantage banking experience and the 
continued build out of our healthcare strategy with the 
recent acquisition of cloud-based MDBilling.ca; and other 
examples across our Wealth Management, Investor & 
Treasury Services and Insurance teams.

I truly believe there’s no other large 
bank in the world that delivers the 
differentiated client experience we do 
at scale. 

Of course, none of this is possible without investing in 
our collaborative and client-focused people. Every day, 
our employees are turning ambitious and bold ideas into 

6  |  Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022

game-changing reality – in areas from cyber security to AI 
and machine learning, digital to software development, 
architecture to data science. We’re building the bank of the 
future, and right now we’re tracking ahead of the game.

If it doesn’t exist, we’re probably working on it.

Climate and inclusion plans that can make  
progress possible
In a complex environment, our clients and communities look 
to us to make sense of the world around them, share our 
views, speak up and lean in on issues that demand action. 

In fact, this is a business imperative for RBC, and what we’re 
doing fills me with optimism about the inclusive, sustainable 
and prosperous communities we’re helping to build.

Climate change is one of the world’s 
most pressing issues – one that can 
impact where we live, our food supply 
and the world around us. The actions 
we take in the coming years will have a 
lasting effect for generations to come.

The best way RBC can help is by partnering with our clients 
to reduce their emissions. We committed to providing $500 
billion in sustainable financing by 2025 – which means 
financing activities that take into account environmental, 
social and governance factors – and are on our way to 
reaching that goal. This supports everything from the 
development and deployment of clean energy technologies 
to new opportunities in carbon capture use and storage, 
low-carbon fuels, grid innovations and electric vehicles, just 
to name a few examples.

We recently released our initial interim emissions reduction 
targets across three key sectors – oil & gas, power 
generation and automotive – to help us track and measure 
how we’re doing in working with our clients to reduce their 
emissions and keep us accountable along the way. 

It’s critical that businesses, governments and individuals 
work together to reshape our economies and societies if 
we are to be successful. We cannot act independently and 
expect to make progress. RBC is committed to helping play a 
coordinating role in this effort to build a cleaner future and 
bring green solutions to market. This also includes helping 
to promote climate literacy and offering ideas and research 
that inform and inspire a successful transition.

Taking collective action on the net-zero transition requires 
more than financial capital. We must also unlock the 
incredible potential of people, particularly talent from 
historically underrepresented groups(3) and young people.

Our society cannot move forward to 
address the big economic and societal 
issues if people and communities are  
at risk of falling behind or being left  
out completely. 

To address the climate challenge and other skills challenges 
across our changing economy, societies need to transform 
the way we train and reskill people and build more inclusive 
workforces. To help, we created RBC Future Launch® – a 
10-year, $500 million commitment to prepare youth for 
the jobs of tomorrow – and we’ve reached more than five 
million young Canadians through tools, scholarships and 
partnerships since 2017.

Alongside new entrepreneur loan programs and scholarship 
assistance, I’m particularly proud of the impact RBC Future  
Launch® continues to have in helping empower Black and 
Indigenous leaders of tomorrow to reach their potential.

People and culture that will define our future
As a relationship-driven bank, our culture and people are 
a major factor in determining what we strive to achieve 
and how we perform against those aspirations. Many of 
RBC’s best moments happen when our people are together 
– problem solving with our clients, being active in our 
communities and collaborating alongside each other. 

Over the past few months, we’ve been finding the right balance 
as we continue to build our flexible and hybrid working model 
for the future – a model that will strengthen our creative, 
collaborative, inclusive and always-learning culture.

It hasn’t been easy to get to where we are today, but I’m 
proud of the way our teams led through tremendous 
disruption and uncertainty, and responded to the needs of 
our clients and communities throughout the pandemic with 
resilience and determination. 

Looking ahead, we aim to continue to be an organization 
that leads the way on skills and career development, equity 
and inclusion and the new world of work. This year, we were 
recognized as one of Canada’s top employers for diversity, 
young people and professional development(4). We were  
also named one of the best workplaces in Canada for  
hybrid working(5).

(3)  A group that is historically underrepresented may include those who self-identify as 
women; Black, Indigenous, and People of Colour (BIPOC); LGBTQ+ and/or persons 
with disabilities 

(4) MediaCorp Canada Inc.
(5) Great Place to Work Institute

Lastly, what our people across the globe do in our 
communities is what will continue to drive our culture. We 
bring our resources, talents and connections together to 
make positive change – from empowering ascending artists 
who are the heart of our vibrant and inclusive cities and 
towns, to supporting relief and recovery efforts when a 
natural disaster strikes one of our communities.

This year, through our first-ever global Employee Giving 
Campaign, our people rallied to support communities at 
a time of great need, collectively contributing nearly $22 
million to over 9,500 charities in more than two dozen 
countries around the world.

Alongside this program, our global RBC Race for the Kids 
event series has brought together communities in support 
of critical youth mental health and wellness causes for over 
a decade. To date, we’ve raised more than $83 million for 
youth-focused charities around the world.

These are just two examples of the impact RBC colleagues 
can achieve when working together to help solve important 
societal or community challenges.

Looking ahead
While it might be hard to imagine in an increasingly 
disruptive and complex world, I have a great deal of 
optimism and hope for the year ahead. 

Part of the strength of RBC is our ability to adapt to the many 
needs of our clients and communities. Right now, RBC needs 
to be both a beacon and an anchor to those we proudly 
serve. We’ve embraced this role throughout the pandemic, 
and I’m confident we’ll continue doing so.

This is just one of the reasons why we 
say ideas happen here.

I want to thank you for your trust and belief in Team RBC and 
what we’ll do to thrive and prosper together in the years ahead. 

As we enter 2023, I have more conviction than ever in where 
our great organization is going and how we’ll get there 
together. We have an ambitious plan to build even more 
amazing digital experiences for our clients and help play an 
important role to solve some of society’s biggest challenges.

I look forward to sharing our progress in the year ahead.

Dave McKay 
President and CEO

Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022  |  7

RBC employees – WaterPark Place, Toronto, CanadaRBC believes leadership centres on serving others.

Helping clients make smart decisions today and remain 
confident in their financial future is at the heart of 
everything we do.

Providing our colleagues with greater flexibility and 
personalized work experiences, while remaining engaged 
and inspired to make meaningful contributions to our 
success is a central focus of RBC’s employee experience.

Addressing economic and social ills exposed by the 
pandemic and placing the planet on a more sustainable 
path is not only essential to the success of the communities 
where we serve, but also our own.

RBC continued to align its Purpose with performance to 
drive premium growth and, in turn, create value for all its 
stakeholders, including shareholders. The Board’s ongoing 
confidence in RBC is underpinned by its leadership team, 
financial strength and scale, growth strategy, diverse 
business mix, powerful brand and engaged and motivated 
workforce.

Directors serve as stewards of 
the bank, exercising independent 
judgement in overseeing management 
and safeguarding the interests of 
its shareholders. We also recognize 
the bank is not a passive participant 
in society. It must – and does – take 
responsibility for its commitments  
and actions.

Governance is key in all of this. The Board not only helps 
set a strategic direction for the bank, but also oversees the 
policies and practices that monitor, measure and report 
on its performance in a timely and transparent manner. 
Promoting a strong risk-aware culture and conduct-related 
practices throughout RBC are also priorities for the Board.

Climate continues to be a key area of focus for the Board. 
Directors oversee the bank’s climate strategy, the RBC 
Climate Blueprint, and how environmental and social risks 
are managed. They assess and evaluate progress against 
the bank’s goals, commitments, plans, targets and metrics 
to determine their effectiveness and impact.

An important milestone was reached this year with the 
release of RBC’s 2030 initial interim emissions reduction 
targets for certain high-emitting sectors: oil & gas, power 
generation and automotive. In addition, a Sustainable 
Finance Framework was published which outlines the bank’s 
approach and methodology for classifying, tracking and 
disclosing its progress towards the commitment to provide 
$500 billion in sustainable financing by 2025. Sustainable 
finance solutions provide clients with products and services 
that contribute to key environmental, social and governance 
(ESG) objectives.

More broadly, we believe the bank’s approach to ESG has 
and will continue to have a significant impact on RBC’s 
success and those we serve. For instance, oversight of 
RBC’s diversity and inclusion (D&I) practices, policies and 
initiatives are carried out at the Board.

A message  

from Katie 
Taylor

Chair of the Board

8  |  Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022

In 2022, the Board reviewed a refreshed D&I strategy that 
serves both colleagues and communities with, for instance, 
a focus on improving representation in leadership at all 
levels and influencing equitable access to financial products 
and services. Additionally, 31 per cent of new executive 
appointments were Black, Indigenous or people of colour, 
surpassing our goal for 2022. We nonetheless still need 
to do more to further increase women representation at 
the executive level, as women made up 43 per cent of new 
executive appointments, below our 50 per cent target(1).

Similarly, good governance is a never-ending journey. A 
large, vibrant enterprise like RBC will regularly come across 
new themes or issues that require the Board’s engagement. 
That’s why the Board’s areas of focus are continuously 
assessed to align with regulatory requirements, 
stakeholders’ expectations, evolving best practices as well 
as changes in the industry and economy. Committee work 
and priorities may adapt as a result. Directors look for ways 
to continuously improve their understanding in areas of 
importance, engage with external advisors and participate 
in education sessions to remain abreast of evolving risks 
and opportunities.

In 2022, we added to the Board’s strength with the 
appointment of Mirko Bibic, President and Chief Executive 
Officer of BCE Inc. and Bell Canada. His deep strategic, 
operational, governance and risk experience across a 
wide range of commercial and consumer portfolios in the 
communications sector will strengthen the capabilities and 
broaden the perspectives of the Board.

Eight years ago, when I wrote my first shareholder letter 
as RBC Chair, I spoke about the inextricable link between 
our stakeholders’ success and the bank’s. As the largest 
Canadian financial institution by market capitalization and 

indeed, one of the largest in the world by the same measure, 
I underscored the high standard RBC must set as a leading 
corporate citizen.

When leadership centres on serving others, great things 
happen. During my time as Chair, RBC’s client base has 
grown by approximately one million and the total value of 
deposits has almost doubled(2), a testament to the bank’s 
client-first focus. Benefits have expanded and evolved to 
keep pace with changing employee needs and expectations. 
The bank embarked upon a 10-year, $500 million 
commitment to set youth up for success through RBC Future 
Launch®. This initiative has provided $331+ million since 2017, 
reaching over five million Canadian youth(3). Net income has 
increased at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 7 per 
cent. Additionally, share price and dividends have grown at a 
CAGR of 6 per cent and 7 per cent respectively(4).

Serving as RBC Chair has been both an honour and great 
privilege for me. I am grateful for the Directors past and 
present who have led us to this exciting point in the bank’s 
journey. I am equally grateful to each and every RBCer 
who has and continues to build this extraordinary global 
franchise with passion and purpose. Going forward, as a 
proud RBC shareholder, I will watch with keen interest in how 
Dave, his leadership team and our incredible colleagues find 
even more new ways to create value and make an impact. 
We will all be better for it. 

Kathleen Taylor 
Chair of the Board

Royal Bank Plaza – South Tower, Toronto, Canada

(1)  Refer to page 13 of the 2022 Annual Report for additional information
(2)   Between October 31, 2014 and October 31, 2022, client base has increased from 

(3)  Refer to page 15 of the 2022 Annual Report for additional information
(4)  Between October 31, 2014 and October 31, 2022, net income increased from $9.0 

16 million to 17 million and deposits from $614.1 billion to $1,208.8 billion

billion to $15.8 billion, share price increased from $80.01 to $126.05, and dividends 
declared per common share increased from $2.84 to $4.96

Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022  |  9

2022 highlights across our balanced scorecard

Clients

At RBC, our clients are at the centre of everything we do. Enabled by 
our investments in technology and talent, we believe our differentiated 
advice, products and services deliver long-term value and create 
exceptional client experiences.

Customer Service Award 
Winner among the big 5 
retail banks – Recognized 
in all 11 categories of the 
2022 Ipsos Financial Service 
Excellence Awards, for the 
2nd consecutive year

Best in Customer 
Satisfaction among 
Canada’s big 5 retail banks 
by J.D. Power, 6 out of the 
last 7 years, and, in 2022, 
ranked highest in Customer 
Satisfaction with Mobile 
Banking Apps

Market-leading client franchises

   #1 or #2 market share in all key product 
categories across Canadian Banking 

   Largest retail mutual fund company in Canada 
based on assets under management (AUM)(3)

   9th largest global investment bank(1), #1 in 

   Largest Canadian bank-owned insurance 

Canada and #1 Canadian investment bank in  
the U.S.(2)

organization(4)

   #1 in market share for High Net Worth/Ultra 

High Net Worth in Canada

    6th largest full-service wealth advisory 

firm in the U.S. as measured by assets under 
administration (AUA)(3)

(1)  Based on global investment banking fees (fiscal 2022), Dealogic
(2) Based on market share (fiscal 2022), Dealogic

(3) Refer to the Glossary for definition on page 126
(4) On a total revenue basis

10  |  Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022

RBC Dominion Securities ranked highest 
among Canadian bank-owned investment 
brokerage firms for the 16th consecutive year(9)

Leveraged our industry-leading Canadian 
mobile app to deliver value-added client 
insights. 3.3 million clients have activated 
personalized plans through MyAdvisor®

Partnered with ICICI Bank Canada to create a 
seamless banking experience for newcomers 
to Canada

RBCx™ supports 4,000 tech and innovation 
clients and in-house ventures like Mydoh® 
(used by 100,000+ Canadians), Ownr® (trusted 
by 85,000+ Canadian businesses) and Dr. Bill® 
(serving 8,000 physicians)

Best Global Retail Bank and Best Bank for 
small and medium-sized enterprises(10)

Expanded the Avion Rewards™ loyalty 
program with METRO Inc., Lowe’s‡, RONA‡ and 
Réno-Dépôt‡ joining our retail partnerships 
with Petro-Canada‡(11), WestJet‡, Rexall‡, 
DoorDash‡ and more

RBC Global Asset Management® named TopGun 
Investment Team of the Year(5)

One of the top 3 Greenwich Quality Leaders in 
Canadian Institutional Investment Management 
Service for the 8th consecutive year(6)

Recognized as the most valuable Canadian 
brand and 2nd among the Top 10 Global Banks(7)

Outstanding Global Private Bank in North 
America for the 7th consecutive year(8)

(5)  Brendan Wood International
(6)  Coalition Greenwich
(7)  Kantar BrandZ Most Valuable Global Brands
(8)  Private Banker International Global Wealth Awards

(9)  Investment Executive Brokerage Report Card
(10) RBI Global retail banking awards
(11)  Petro-Canada is a Suncor business

Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022  |  11

2022 highlights across our balanced scorecard

Employees

Our collective success depends on attracting, retaining and developing 
the right talent to deliver on our strategy. From wellness and flexibility, 
to skill building and leadership development, we are committed to 
supporting, enabling and empowering our employees as they help  
our clients thrive and communities prosper.

Among Canada’s Top 100 
Employers, Canada’s Best 
Diversity Employers and Best 
Workplaces in 2022(1)(2)

Recognized as one of the Best 
Workplaces for Professional 
Development for our experiential 
learning, coaching, mentorship 
and formal training(2)

Named one of the Best 
Workplaces for Hybrid Work 
for flexibility and resources 
available to support the new 
world of work(2)

Announced a $200 million investment in  
our employees, including a mid-year 3% 
salary increase, enhanced defined pension 
contributions and family benefits in Canada, 
and more support for career development

Enhanced our critical tech talent strategy 
with a new Tech Career Journey and 
storytelling initiatives to strengthen our 
reputation as a top employer, welcoming 
2,300 experienced technologists, 39% of 
whom were women

$16.5 billion in competitive compensation  
and benefits

Recognized as one of Canada’s Top Employers 
for Young People(1)

(1)  MediaCorp Canada Inc.
(2)  Great Place to Work Institute

12  |  Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022

Accelerating our progress in Diversity  
& Inclusion:

Black, Indigenous and People of Colour 
(BIPOC) represented:
  43% of hires(3)
  43% of promotions(4)
   31% of new executive appointments, 

surpassing our goal of 30% for the year(5)

2022 Employee Engagement Survey found 
employees are highly engaged and feel proud  
to be part of RBC(8):
   93% feel they contribute to RBC’s success
  89% are proud to be part of RBC
  88% are willing to go above and beyond

Women represented: 
  51% of hires(3)
  53% of promotions(4)
  43% of new executive appointments(5)

Global employee base comprised of 20% young 
people(6)

Welcomed 1,500+ summer students across  
the globe, 52% were BIPOC(7)

Introduced a new HR management system with 
self-serve processes and AI-enabled learning and 
job recommendations to support career growth 
and enhance our employees’ digital experience

(3)   Hires includes new external hires and rehires excluding City National Bank, BlueBay 

Asset Management and Brewin Dolphin; based on self-identification; excludes summer 
interns, students and co-ops. BIPOC hires includes Canada and U.S. only. Women hires is 
global

(4)   Promotions are defined as an upward change in position level, HR Class or Global 

Grade. Excludes summer interns, students, co-ops, City National Bank, Blue Bay Asset 
Management and Brewin Dolphin. Values for women represent data from our global 
operations. Values for BIPOC represent data from our businesses in Canada and the 
U.S., based on self-identification 

(5)   Represents data for our businesses in Canada governed by the Employment Equity Act. 
A new executive appointment is the appointment of an internal employee or external 
hire as a first-time Vice President, Senior Vice President or Executive Vice President
(6)   Headcount under 30 globally, excluding City National, BlueBay Asset Management and 

Brewin Dolphin employees
(7)  Based on self-identification
(8)   Employee Engagement Survey conducted between April 27-May 11, 2022; participation 

rate was 73%

Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022  |  13

2022 highlights across our balanced scorecard

Communities

Supporting the communities where we live and work is central to our 
Purpose. Through our global partnerships, donations and employee 
initiatives, RBC is committed to building vibrant, socially inclusive  
and sustainable communities.

With our key programs – RBC Future Launch®, Tech for Nature™ and 
Emerging Artists – our approach is aligned to our priority ESG pillars 
including youth, climate, diversity & inclusion and financial wellness.

$154+ million given globally through donations and community investments, including nearly 
$1.9 million to support humanitarian relief efforts in Ukraine, Pakistan, natural disaster response 
efforts in Canada and the U.S., and in response to local tragedies(1) 

Employees stepped up to participate in the second RBC Global Earth Day Challenge, completing 
51,000+ earth-friendly activities. RBC provided rewards for completing each activity, leading to 
$760,000+ in support of local charities

Celebrated the return of live events with marquee enterprise sponsorships, including the RBC 
Canadian Open, RBC Heritage, RBCxMusic® Concert Series and the Toronto International Film Festival

(1)   Includes employee volunteer grants and gifts in kind, as well as contributions to non-profits and non-registered charities. Figure includes sponsorships

14  |  Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022

Since its start in 2009, the  
RBC Race for the Kids  
has raised $83+ million for 
youth-focused charities 
around the world. In 2022, 
37,000+ participants raised 
$9+ million for 22 charities 
across 10 countries

$331+ million provided through RBC Future 
Launch®, reaching 5.3 million Canadian youth 
through 840+ partner programs since 2017. Through 
our $1.6 million investment in RBC Future Launch® 
scholarships this year, 500+ young Canadians will 
have the opportunity to pursue their business and 
academic passions

RBC Charity Day for the Kids donated US$5 million 
to 55+ youth-focused charities around the globe. 
Since launching in 2015, this initiative has raised 
US$25.2 million for 100+ organizations

Through the RBC Emerging Artists program, our 
investments in arts organizations have exceeded 
$119 million, supporting 35,000+ artists since 2007

Launched the RBC Black Entrepreneur Business 
Loan, supporting Black entrepreneurs in Canada 
as they start, manage and grow their business with 
loans of up to $250,000

(2) Refer to page 101 of the 2022 Annual Report for additional information

Expanded our Employee Giving Campaign 
globally, with 81% of RBC employees supporting 
9,500+ charities across 28 countries. Together  
with retirees, RBC raised $21.8 million

$6 billion in support of our communities as one of 
the largest taxpayers in Canada, and as a taxpayer 
in other countries where we operate(2)

Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022  |  15

2022 highlights across our balanced scorecard

Sustainability

Climate change presents a significant challenge that is impacting 
communities globally. Achieving net-zero greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions by 2050 requires one of the largest economic 
transformations in generations. RBC is committed to working 
alongside governments, businesses and individuals to facilitate 
meaningful progress towards net-zero.

16  |  Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022

   Signed our second long-term renewable energy Power Purchase 
Agreement, advancing our goals to reduce emissions from our 
global operations by 70% and to source 100% of our electricity from 
renewable and non-emitting sources, both by 2025

   Acted as a financial advisor to 23 Indigenous communities buying 
an ownership stake in 7 Enbridge pipelines in Northern Alberta – the 
largest Indigenous energy partnership transaction in North America, 
to-date(1)

   RBC GAM is a founding signatory to the Canadian Investor 

Statement on Climate Change, which demonstrates the collective 
ambition and action of Canadian investors in recognizing the need 
to accelerate the transition towards a net-zero economy

   Supported the development and deployment of cutting-edge 
clean energy technologies through our investment in funds  
like EVOK, focusing on opportunities in carbon capture use & 
storage (CCUS), low-carbon fuels, clean energy, grid innovations 
and mobility(2)

RBC released its Sustainable Finance 
Framework, which outlines the approach 
the bank takes to measure progress against 
its commitment to provide $500 billion in 
sustainable financing by 2025

RBC delivered a key milestone in its 
commitment to achieving net-zero in its 
lending portfolio by 2050 with the release 
of its initial set of 2030 interim emissions 
reduction targets for key sectors: oil  
& gas, power generation and automotive

RBC intends to help finance the transition to 
net-zero, strengthen a diverse and inclusive 
culture, and build stronger communities and 
enable economic inclusion

Honoured as ESG Manager of the year through 
the 2022 UK Pensions Awards

Ranked #4 globally in Institutional Investor’s 
ESG Research Team category

RBC Tech for Nature™, a global initiative to support 
new ideas, technologies, and partnerships that 
address complex environmental challenges.  
Since 2019, 550+ organizations have benefitted  
from $39+ million in community investments 
towards a $100 million commitment by 2025

(1)  Indigenous Communities and Enbridge Announce Landmark Equity Partnership 
(2)  Evok Innovations Announces First Close of $300 Million USD Cleantech Fund

Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022  |  17

2022 highlights across our balanced scorecard

Shareholders

RBC is driven by its vision, values and commitment to delivering 
long-term results.

Financial performance metrics

Medium-Term Objectives(1)

Diluted EPS growth of 7%+

ROE of 16%+

Strong capital ratio (CET1)

Dividend payout ratio of 40%–50%

Total shareholder return(2)

RBC

Global peer average

3-Year

8%

16.4%

12.9%

46%

3-Year

10%

6%

Earnings
net income (C$ billion)

Revenue by segment(3)
(C$ billion)

$16.1

$15.8

Annualized Dividend 
Increase of:

$9.1
Capital 
Markets

$2.2
I&TS

$3.5
Insurance

7%
Five year(4)

10%
Ten year(4)

2021

2022

5-Year

8%

16.7%

12.5%

46%

5-Year

9%

5%

$20.1 
P&CB

$14.8
Wealth 
Management

(1)   A medium-term (3-5 year) objective is considered to be achieved when the performance goal is met in either a 3- or 5-year period. 

These objectives assume a normal business environment and our ability to achieve them in a period may be adversely affected by the 
macroeconomic backdrop

(2)   Annualized TSR is calculated based on the TSX common share price appreciation plus reinvested dividend income. Source: Bloomberg, as at 

October 31, 2022. Please refer to page 24

(3) Excludes Corporate Support
(4) Compound Annual Growth Rate

18  |  Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022

Strong funding profile
Long-term credit rating upgraded 
to Aa1 by Moody’s(8)

Approximately 400,000 net new 
clients added in 2022

Leading 103% ratio of loans to 
deposits in Canadian Banking

$11.06
diluted earnings per share (EPS), 
flat from 2021

$4.96 dividends
declared per share, up 15% from 
2021; dividend payout ratio of 45%

$12.4 billion of profits returned 
to our shareholders through 
dividends and share repurchases; 
total payout ratio of 80%(6)

(5) Refer to the Glossary for definition on page 127
(6)   Total payout ratio is calculated as total common shareholder distributions (common dividends of $6.9 billion + common share repurchases  

of $5.4 billion) as a percentage of net income available to common shareholders ($15.5 billion) 

(7)  Average percentile ranking and rating compiled from our priority ESG rating agencies and indices: Sustainalytics, MSCI ESG Rating, FTSE4Good 

and S&P Global’s Corporate Sustainability Assessment (informing the DJSI) – FTSE4Good and MSCI ratings reflect 2021 scores. The ESG rankings 
and ratings market is evolving and is not currently regulated in Canada or the U.S. ESG rating agencies and indices may use different data, metrics, 
models and/or methodologies. ESG ranking and ratings are not necessarily comparable, and those given to RBC are for information only. Investors 
and other stakeholders should carefully consider the foregoing factors and other uncertainties when reviewing these rankings and ratings
(8)  On January 27, 2022, Moody’s upgraded our long-term debt ratings and assessments, as well as affirmed our short-term debt ratings. Includes 

senior long-term debt issued prior to September 23, 2018 and senior long-term debt issued on or after September 23, 2018 which is excluded from 
the Bail-in regime

Royal Bank of Canada Annual Report 2022  |  19

80.25(7)average percentile ranking and rating on our priority ESG indices16.4% return on common equity(5),down from 18.6% in 202112.6% robust common equity  tier 1 (CET1) ratioPrudent risk management with 10 basis points of provision for credit losses (PCL) on impaired loansManagement’s Discussion and Analysis 

 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) is provided to enable a reader to assess our results of operations and financial condition for the fiscal  
year ended October 31, 2022, compared to the preceding fiscal year. This MD&A should be read in conjunction with our 2022 Annual Consolidated  
Financial Statements and related notes and is dated November 29, 2022. All amounts are in Canadian dollars, unless otherwise specified, and are based  
on financial statements presented in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) as issued by the International Accounting  
Standards Board (IASB), unless otherwise noted.  

Additional information about us, including our 2022 Annual Information Form, is available free of charge on our website at rbc.com/investorrelations, on  
the Canadian Securities Administrators’ website at sedar.com and on the EDGAR section of the United States (U.S.) Securities and Exchange  
Commission’s (SEC) website at sec.gov.  

Information contained in or otherwise accessible through the websites mentioned herein does not form part of this report. All references in this report to  
websites are inactive textual references and are for your information only.  

Caution regarding forward-looking  

Key performance and non-GAAP  

Operational/regulatory compliance  

statements  

20  

measures  

Table of contents 

Overview and outlook  

21  
Selected financial and other highlights   21  
22  
About Royal Bank of Canada  
Vision and strategic goals  
22  
Economic, market and regulatory  

review and outlook  

Key corporate events of 2022   
Defining and measuring success  

22  
23  

through total shareholder returns  

24  

Financial performance  

24  
Overview  
24  
Impact of foreign currency translation   25  
25  
Total revenue  
Provision for credit losses  
26  
Insurance policyholder benefits, claims  

and acquisition expense  

Non-interest expense  
Income and other taxes  
Client assets  

Business segment results  

Results by business segment  
How we measure and report our  

business segments  

27  
27  
27  
28  

29  
29  

29  

Personal & Commercial Banking  
Wealth Management  
Insurance  
Investor & Treasury Services  
Capital Markets  
Corporate Support  

Quarterly financial information  
Fourth quarter performance  
Quarterly results and trend analysis  

Financial condition  

Condensed balance sheets  
Off-balance sheet arrangements  

Risk management  

Top and emerging risks  
Overview  
Enterprise risk management  

30  
32  
37  
43  
47  
49  
53  

53  
53  
54  

55  
55  
56  

58  
58  
60  
61  

Transactional/positional risk drivers   66  
66  
76  
81  
94  

Credit risk  
Market risk  
Liquidity and funding risk  
Insurance risk  

risk drivers  
Operational risk  
Regulatory compliance risk  

94  
94  
96  

Strategic risk drivers  

97  
97  
Strategic risk  
Reputation risk  
97  
Legal and regulatory environment risk   98  
99  
Competitive risk  

Macroeconomic risk drivers  

Systemic risk  

Overview of other risks  

Capital management  

Accounting and control matters  
Critical accounting policies and  

estimates  

Controls and procedures  

Related party transactions  

Supplementary information  

Glossary  

Enhanced Disclosure Task Force  

recommendations index  

99  
99  

100  

105  

114  

114  
117  

117  

118  

126  

128  

Caution regarding forward-looking statements  

From time to time, we make written or oral forward-looking statements within the meaning of certain securities laws, including the “safe harbour” provisions 
of the United States Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and any applicable Canadian securities legislation. We may make forward-looking 
statements in this 2022 Annual Report, in other filings with Canadian regulators or the SEC, in other reports to shareholders, and in other communications. 
Forward-looking statements in this document include, but are not limited to, statements relating to our financial performance objectives, vision and strategic 
goals, the economic, market, and regulatory review and outlook for Canadian, U.S., U.K., European and global economies, the regulatory environment in 
which we operate, the impact from rising interest rates, the expected closing of the transaction involving HSBC Bank Canada, the Strategic priorities and 
Outlook sections for each of our business segments, the risk environment including our credit risk, market risk, liquidity and funding risk, the direction of the 
coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic and its potential impact on our business operations, financial results, condition and objectives and on the global economy 
and financial market conditions, our climate- and sustainability-related beliefs, targets and goals (including our net-zero and sustainable finance 
commitments), and includes our President and Chief Executive Officer’s statements. The forward-looking information contained in this document is 
presented for the purpose of assisting the holders of our securities and financial analysts in understanding our financial position and results of operations 
as at and for the periods ended on the dates presented, as well as our financial performance objectives, vision and strategic goals, and may not be 
appropriate for other purposes. Forward-looking statements are typically identified by words such as “believe”, “expect”, “foresee”, “forecast”, “anticipate”, 
“intend”, “estimate”, “goal”, “commit”, “target”, “objective”, “plan” and “project” and similar expressions of future or conditional verbs such as “will”, “may”, 
“might”, “should”, “could” or “would”. 

By their very nature, forward-looking statements require us to make assumptions and are subject to inherent risks and uncertainties, which give rise to 

the possibility that our predictions, forecasts, projections, expectations or conclusions will not prove to be accurate, that our assumptions may not be 
correct that our financial performance, environmental & social or other objectives, vision and strategic goals will not be achieved, and that our actual results 
may differ materially from such predictions, forecasts, projections, expectations or conclusions. 

We caution readers not to place undue reliance on these statements as a number of risk factors could cause our actual results to differ materially from 

the expectations expressed in such forward-looking statements. These factors – many of which are beyond our control and the effects of which can be 
difficult to predict – include: credit, market, liquidity and funding, insurance, operational, regulatory compliance (which could lead to us being subject to 
various legal and regulatory proceedings, the potential outcome of which could include regulatory restrictions, penalties and fines), strategic, reputation, 
competitive, model, legal and regulatory environment, systemic risks and other risks discussed in the risk sections of our 2022 Annual Report including 
business and economic conditions in the geographic regions in which we operate, Canadian housing and household indebtedness, information technology 
and cyber risks, geopolitical uncertainty, environmental and social risk (including climate change), digital disruption and innovation, privacy, data and third-
party related risks, regulatory changes, culture and conduct risks, the effects of changes in government fiscal, monetary and other policies, tax risk and 
transparency, and the emergence of widespread health emergencies or public health crises such as pandemics and epidemics, including the COVID-19 
pandemic and its impact on the global economy, financial market conditions and our business operations, and financial results, condition and objectives. 
Additional factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the expectations in such forward-looking statements can be found in the risk 
section of our 2022 Annual Report. 

We caution that the foregoing list of risk factors is not exhaustive and other factors could also adversely affect our results. When relying on our forward-

looking statements to make decisions with respect to us, investors and others should carefully consider the foregoing factors and other uncertainties and 
potential events. Material economic assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements contained in this 2022 Annual Report are set out in the Economic, 
market and regulatory review and outlook section and for each business segment under the Strategic priorities and Outlook headings. Except as required by 
law, we do not undertake to update any forward-looking statement, whether written or oral, that may be made from time to time by us or on our behalf. 

Additional information about these and other factors can be found in the risk sections of this 2022 Annual Report. 

20

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Overview and outlook  

Selected financial and other highlights

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except per share, number of and percentage amounts)  

Total revenue  
Provision for credit losses (PCL)  
Insurance policyholder benefits, claims and acquisition expense (PBCAE)  
Non-interest expense  
Income before income taxes  

Net income  

Segments – net income  

Personal & Commercial Banking  
Wealth Management  
Insurance  
Investor & Treasury Services  
Capital Markets  
Corporate Support  

Net income  

Selected information  

Earnings per share (EPS) – basic  

– diluted  
Return on common equity (ROE) (1)  
Average common equity (1)  
Net interest margin (NIM) – on average earning assets, net (2)  
PCL on loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances  
PCL on performing loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances  
PCL on impaired loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances  
Gross impaired loans (GIL) as a % of loans and acceptances  
Liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) (3)  
Net stable funding ratio (NSFR) (3)  

Capital, Leverage and Total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC) ratios (4)  

Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratio  
Tier 1 capital ratio  
Total capital ratio  
Leverage ratio  
TLAC ratio (5)  
TLAC leverage ratio (5)  

Selected balance sheet and other information (6)  

Total assets  
Securities, net of applicable allowance  
Loans, net of allowance for loan losses  
Derivative related assets  
Deposits  
Common equity  
Total risk-weighted assets  
Assets under management (AUM) (2)  
Assets under administration (AUA) (2), (7)  

Common share information  

Shares outstanding (000s) – average basic  

– average diluted  
– end of period  

Dividends declared per common share  
Dividend yield (2)  
Dividend payout ratio (2)  
Common share price (RY on TSX) (8)  
Market capitalization (TSX) (8)  

Business information (number of)  

Employees (full-time equivalent) (FTE)  
Bank branches  
Automated teller machines (ATMs)  

Period average US$ equivalent of C$1.00 (9)  
Period-end US$ equivalent of C$1.00  

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$

$ 

2022  
48,985   $
484  
1,783  
26,609  
20,109  

  

8,370   $
3,144  
857  
513  
2,921  
2  

  

11.08   $
11.06  
16.4%  
94,700   $
1.48%  
0.06%  
(0.04)%  
0.10%  
0.26%  
125%  
112%  

  
12.6%  
13.8%  
15.4%  
4.4%  
26.4%  
8.5%  

Table 1   

2021  
49,693   $
(753)  
3,891  
25,924  
20,631  

2022 vs. 2021  
Increase (decrease)  

(708)  
1,237  
(2,108)  
685  
(522)  

(1.4)%  
(164.3)%  
(54.2)%  
2.6%  
(2.5)%  

  

7,847   $
2,626  
889  
440  
4,187  
61  

  
523  
518  
(32)  
73  
(1,266)  
(59)  

  
6.7%  
19.7%  
(3.6)%  
16.6%  
(30.2)%  
n.m.  

15,807   $

16,050   $

(243)  

(1.5)%  

15,807   $

16,050   $

(243)  

(1.5)%  

  

11.08   $
11.06  
18.6%  
84,850   $
1.48%  
(0.10)%  
(0.20)%  
0.10%  
0.31%  
123%  
116%  

  
13.7%  
14.9%  
16.7%  
4.9%  
n.a.  
n.a.  

  
0.00  
0.00  
n.m.  
9,850  
n.m.  
n.m.  
n.m.  
n.m.  
n.m.  
n.m.  
n.m.  

  
n.m.  
n.m.  
n.m.  
n.m.  
n.a.  
n.a.  

  

  

  
$ 1,917,219   $ 1,706,323   $ 210,896  
33,499  
102,390  
58,898  
107,983  
8,763  
57,338  
(9,000)  
(697,600)  

318,223  
819,965  
154,439  
1,208,814  
100,746  
609,879  
999,700  
5,649,700  

284,724  
717,575  
95,541  
1,100,831  
91,983  
552,541  
1,008,700  
6,347,300  

  
1,403,654  
1,406,034  
1,382,911  

  
1,424,343  
1,426,735  
1,424,525  

$ 

$ 

4.96   $
3.7%  
45%  
126.05   $

4.32   $
3.8%  
39%  
128.82   $

174,316  

183,507  

  
91,427  
1,271  
4,368  

  
85,301  
1,295  
4,378  

  
(20,689)  
(20,701)  
(41,614)  
0.64  
n.m.  
n.m.  
(2.77)  
(9,191)  

  
6,126  
(24)  
(10)  

$ 
$ 

0.774   $
0.734   $

0.796   $ (0.022)  
0.808   $ (0.074)  

  
0.0%  
0.0%  
(220) bps  
11.6%  
– bps  
16 bps  
16 bps  
– bps  
(5) bps  
200 bps  
(400) bps  

  
(110) bps  
(110) bps  
(130) bps  
(50) bps  
n.a.  
n.a.  

  
12.4%  
11.8%  
14.3%  
61.6%  
9.8%  
9.5%  
10.4%  
(0.9)%  
(11.0)%  

  
(1.5)%  
(1.5)%  
(2.9)%  
14.8%  
(10) bps  
600 bps  
(2.2)%  
(5.0)%  

  
7.2%  
(1.9)%  
(0.2)%  

(2.8)%  
(9.1)%  

(1) 

(2) 
(3) 

(5) 

Average amounts are calculated using methods intended to approximate the average of the daily balances for the period. This includes average common equity used in 
the calculation of ROE. For further details, refer to the Key performance and non-GAAP measures section. 
See Glossary for composition of this measure. 
The LCR and NSFR are calculated in accordance with the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions’ (OSFI) Liquidity Adequacy Requirements (LAR) guideline. 
LCR is the average for the three months ended for each respective period. For further details, refer to the Liquidity and funding risk section. 

(4)  Capital ratios are calculated using OSFI’s Capital Adequacy Requirements (CAR) guideline and the Leverage ratio is calculated using OSFI’s Leverage Requirements (LR) 

guideline. 
Effective Q1 2022, OSFI requires Canadian Domestic Systemically Important Banks (D-SIBs) to meet minimum risk-based TLAC ratio and TLAC leverage ratio requirements 
which are calculated using OSFI’s TLAC guideline. For further details, refer to the Capital management section. 

AUA includes $15 billion and $6 billion (2021 – $15 billion and $3 billion) of securitized residential mortgages and credit card loans, respectively. 

(6)  Represents year-end spot balances. 
(7) 
(8)  Based on TSX closing market price at period-end. 
(9) 
n.a.  not applicable 
n.m.  not meaningful 

Average amounts are calculated using month-end spot rates for the period. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

21 

About Royal Bank of Canada  

Royal Bank of Canada is a global financial institution with a purpose-driven, principles-led approach to delivering leading 
performance. Our success comes from the 95,000+ employees who leverage their imaginations and insights to bring our vision, 
values and strategy to life so we can help our clients thrive and communities prosper. As Canada’s biggest bank and one of the 
largest in the world, based on market capitalization, we have a diversified business model with a focus on innovation and 
providing exceptional experiences to our 17 million clients in Canada, the U.S. and 27 other countries. Learn more at rbc.com. 

Our business segments are described below. 

Personal &  
Commercial Banking  

Provides a broad suite of financial products and services in Canada, the Caribbean and the U.S.  
Our commitment to building and maintaining deep and meaningful relationships with our clients  
is underscored by the breadth of our product suite, our depth of expertise, and the features of our  
digital solutions.  

Wealth  
Management  

  
Serves affluent, high net worth (HNW) and ultra-high net worth (UHNW) clients from our offices in  
key financial centres mainly in Canada, the U.S., the United Kingdom (U.K.), Europe, and Asia. We  
offer a comprehensive suite of investment, trust, banking, credit and other advice-based  
solutions. We also provide asset management products to institutional and individual clients  
through our distribution channels and third-party distributors.  

Insurance  

Offers a wide range of advice and solutions for individual and business clients including life,  
health, wealth, home, auto, travel, annuities and reinsurance.  

Investor & Treasury  
Services  

Provides asset, payment and treasury services to financial institutions and asset owners  
worldwide. We are a leader in Canadian cash management and transaction banking services.  
Trusted with nearly 4 trillion in AUA, our focus is on safeguarding client assets and supporting our  
clients’ growth.  

Capital Markets  

Provides expertise in advisory & origination, sales & trading, and lending & financing to  
corporations, institutional clients, asset managers, private equity firms and governments  
globally. We serve clients from 63 offices in 18 countries across North America, the U.K. & Europe,  
and Australia, Asia & other regions.  

Corporate Support  

Corporate Support consists of Technology & Operations, which provides the technological and  
operational foundation required to effectively deliver products and services to our clients,  
Functions, which includes our finance, human resources, risk management, internal audit and  
other functional groups, as well as our Corporate Treasury function.  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Vision and strategic goals  

Our business strategies and actions are guided by our vision, “To be among the world’s most trusted and successful financial 
institutions.” Our three strategic goals are: 
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)

In Canada, to be the undisputed leader in financial services; 
In the U.S., to be the preferred partner to corporate, institutional and HNW clients and their businesses; and 
In select global financial centres, to be a leading financial services partner valued for our expertise. 

For our progress in 2022 against our business strategies and strategic goals, refer to the Business segment results section. 

Economic, market and regulatory review and outlook – data as at November 29, 2022  

The predictions and forecasts in this section are based on information and assumptions from sources we consider reliable. If this 
information or these assumptions are not accurate, actual economic outcomes may differ materially from the outlook presented 
in this section. 

Economic and market review and outlook 
Unemployment remains very low across many advanced economies, with labour shortages limiting further increases in 
production. However, we expect unemployment rates will rise as central banks continue to raise interest rates to contain high 
inflation, adding to growth headwinds. The U.S. and Canadian economies are expected to undergo moderate recessions in 
calendar 2023. Recessions in the Euro Area and the United Kingdom (U.K.) have likely already started with higher interest rates 
adding to surging inflation and disruptions from the war in Ukraine. While global inflation pressures have eased with the price of 
key commodities and shipping costs declining from peak levels earlier in calendar 2022, inflation pressures have also broadened 
across a wide array of goods and services. Consumer demand has continued to outpace available supply, and labour shortages 
have driven wages higher, adding to potentially longer-lasting price pressures. Central banks are responding by increasing 
interest rates more quickly than previously expected. Higher interest rates, elevated inflation and a decline in the value of 
equities are reducing household confidence and purchasing power. 

22

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Canada 
Canadian GDP is expected to increase 3.2% in calendar 2022 following a 4.5% increase in calendar 2021. Output growth in this 
calendar year has been supported by recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic in the travel and hospitality sectors and increased 
activity in the oil and gas and mining sectors reflecting higher global commodity prices. Labour market conditions remain tight 
with elevated job openings and unemployment rates at multi-decade lows. Growth is expected to continue to moderate in the 
final calendar quarter of 2022 with a moderate recession expected in the first half of calendar 2023. While the unemployment rate 
is low at 5.2% as of October 2022, it has increased from 4.9% in June and July of 2022. While inflation growth rates have begun to 
moderate as global supply chain disruptions have eased, and house prices are declining in response to Bank of Canada (BoC) 
interest rate increases, the inflation rate in October was still high and pressures remain broad-based. The BoC has already 
increased the overnight rate by 350 basis points since March 2022 and we expect that rate to rise to 4.0% before the end of the 
calendar year. Rising household debt servicing costs, high consumer price growth, and declining house prices are expected to 
weaken household confidence and purchasing power over the next calendar year. 

U.S. 
U.S. GDP is expected to increase 1.8% in calendar 2022 following a 5.9% increase in calendar 2021. Labour markets have remained 
very strong. However the unemployment rate has begun to increase from lows over the summer and the number of job openings 
is decreasing. We expect further increases in the unemployment rate over the remainder of calendar 2022 and in calendar 2023. 
While inflation rates have begun to decrease as global supply chain disruptions ease, and the price of gasoline has declined from 
higher levels in the spring, price growth remains very high and broad-based. The Federal Reserve (Fed) is responding with 
continued interest rate hikes. The Fed has already increased the federal funds rate target by 375 basis points since March 2022 
and we expect that target range will rise to 4.75% to 5.0% by the end of the first calendar quarter of 2023. Higher interest rates 
and inflation are reducing household purchasing power, and we expect consumer spending growth to slow with a moderate 
recession expected in the first half of calendar 2023. 

Europe 
Euro area GDP is expected to rise by 3.0% in calendar 2022 following a 5.3% increase in calendar 2021. The Euro area economy is 
expected to have entered a moderate recession in the second half of calendar 2022. The war in Ukraine is having a more direct 
impact on economies in the Euro area relative to other regions due to stronger direct trade linkages. In addition, inflation in the 
region is expected to continue to surge higher driven by increased energy costs. Despite a slowing growth outlook, surging 
inflation is pushing the European Central Bank (ECB) to raise interest rates from exceptionally low negative rates at the 
beginning of this calendar year. The ECB increased interest rates by 50 bps in July 2022 and another 75 bps in each of September 
and October 2022. We expect further increases to push the deposit rate to 2.5% by the end of the first calendar quarter of 2023. 
U.K. GDP is projected to rise by 4.2% in calendar 2022 after a 7.5% increase in calendar 2021. The U.K. is also expected to have 
entered a recession in the second half of calendar 2022. As inflation in the U.K. has continued to surge, we expect the Bank of 
England (BoE) to raise interest rates more quickly than previously anticipated to 3.75% by early calendar 2023. 

Financial markets 
Bond yields have increased substantially from the second calendar quarter of 2022 as central banks respond to high inflation. 
The spread between longer and shorter duration bond yields, which is a commonly used recession indicator, has narrowed 
sharply with the spread between 10-year and 2-year yields inverting to negative values in the U.S. and Canada. Equity markets 
have declined from the beginning of calendar 2022 on a worsening global growth outlook. Global inflation pressures have shown 
signs of easing and inflation rates may have peaked in some regions such as the U.S. and Canada. However, underlying inflation 
pressures are not expected to ease to central bank target rates until the economy weakens substantially. 

Regulatory environment 
We continue to monitor and prepare for regulatory developments and changes in a manner that seeks to ensure compliance with 
new requirements, while mitigating adverse business or financial impacts. Such impacts could result from new or amended laws 
or regulations and the expectations of those who enforce them. A high level summary of the key regulatory changes that have the 
potential to increase or decrease our costs and the complexity of our operations is included in the Legal and regulatory 
environment risk section of this 2022 Annual Report. 

For a discussion on risk factors resulting from these and other developments which may affect our business and financial 

results, refer to the risk sections of this 2022 Annual Report. For further details on our framework and activities to manage risks, 
refer to the risk and Capital management sections of this 2022 Annual Report. 

Key corporate events of 2022  

HSBC Bank Canada 
On November 29, 2022, we entered into an agreement to acquire 100% of the common shares of HSBC Bank Canada (HSBC 
Canada) for an all-cash purchase price of $13.5 billion. In addition, we will purchase all of the existing preferred shares and 
subordinated debt of HSBC Canada held directly or indirectly by HSBC Holdings plc at par value. HSBC Canada is a premier 
Canadian personal and commercial bank focused on globally connected clients. 

The transaction is expected to close by late 2023 and is subject to the satisfaction of customary closing conditions, including 

regulatory approvals. For further details, refer to Note 33 of our Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Brewin Dolphin Holdings PLC 
On September 27, 2022, we completed the acquisition of Brewin Dolphin Holdings PLC (Brewin Dolphin) for total consideration of 
£1,591 million ($2,341 million) as of the date of close. The results of the acquired business have been consolidated from the 
closing date and are included in International Wealth Management within our Wealth Management segment. For further details, 
refer to Note 6 of our Consolidated Financial Statements. 

RBC Investor Services 
On October 17, 2022, we announced the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding with CACEIS (the asset servicing banking 
group of Crédit Agricole S.A. and Banco Santander, S.A.) with a view for CACEIS to acquire the European asset servicing activities 
of RBC Investor Services and its associated Malaysian centre of excellence. The execution of the final agreements between CACEIS 
and RBC requires prior consultation with the relevant works councils of CACEIS. The completion of the contemplated transaction 
will be subject to customary closing conditions, including regulatory and antitrust approvals, and is expected to take place by the 
end of the third calendar quarter of 2023. This transaction will have a de minimus impact on RBC’s CET1 ratio and EPS. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

23 

Defining and measuring success through total shareholder returns  

Our focus is to maximize total shareholder returns (TSR) through the achievement of top half performance compared to our 
global peer group over the medium-term (3-5 years), which we believe reflects a longer-term view of strong and consistent 
financial performance. 

Maximizing TSR is aligned with our three strategic goals discussed earlier and we believe represents the most appropriate 

measure of shareholder value creation. TSR is a concept used to compare the performance of our common shares over a period 
of time, reflecting share price appreciation and dividends paid to common shareholders. The absolute size of TSR will vary 
depending on market conditions, and the bank’s position reflects the market’s perception of our overall performance relative to 
our peers over a period of time. 

Financial performance objectives are used to measure our performance against our medium-term TSR objectives and are 

used as goals as we execute against our strategic priorities. We review and revise these financial performance objectives as 
economic, market and regulatory environments change. 

The following table provides a summary of our 3-year and 5-year performance against our medium-term financial 

performance objectives: 

Financial performance compared to our medium-term objectives  

Medium-term objectives (1)  
Diluted EPS growth of 7% +  
ROE of 16% +  
Strong capital ratio (CET1) (3)  
Dividend payout ratio 40% – 50%  

3-year (2)  

5-year (2)  

  

  
  
  
  

8%  
16.4%  
12.9%  
46%  

Table 2   

8%  
16.7%  
12.5%  
46%  

(1) 

A medium-term (3-5 year) objective is considered to be achieved when the performance goal is met in either a 3- or 5-year period. These objectives assume a normal 
business environment and our ability to achieve them in a period may be adversely affected by the macroeconomic backdrop. 

(2)  Diluted EPS growth is calculated using a Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR). ROE, CET1 and dividend payout ratio are calculated using an average. 
(3) 

For further details on the CET1 ratio, refer to the Capital management section. 

Our 3-year and 5-year medium-term financial performance objectives will remain unchanged in fiscal 2023. 

We compare our TSR to that of a global peer group approved by our Board of Directors (the Board). The global peer group 
consists of the following 9 financial institutions: 
(cid:129)

Canadian financial institutions: Bank of Montreal, Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Manulife Financial Corporation, 
National Bank of Canada, The Bank of Nova Scotia, and Toronto-Dominion Bank. 
U.S. banks: JPMorgan Chase & Co. and Wells Fargo & Company. 
International banks: Westpac Banking Corporation. 

(cid:129)
(cid:129)

Medium-term objectives – 3- and 5-year TSR vs. peer group average  

  

Royal Bank of Canada  
  

Peer group average (excluding RBC)  

(1) 

The 3- and 5-year annualized TSR are calculated based on our common share price appreciation as per the TSX closing market price plus reinvested dividends for the 
period October 31, 2019 to October 31, 2022 and October 31, 2017 to October 31, 2022. 

Common share and dividend information  

For the year ended October 31  

2022  

2021  

2020  

2019  

Common share price (RY on TSX) – close, end of period  
Dividends paid per share  
Increase (decrease) in share price  
Total shareholder return  

$ 126.05   $ 128.82   $

93.16   $ 106.24   $

4.96  
(2.2)%  
1.6%  

4.32  
38.3%  
43.8%  

4.26  
(12.3)%  
(8.4)%  

4.00  
10.8%  
15.2%  

3-year TSR (1)  

5-year TSR (1)  

10%  
Top half  

6%  

Table 3   

9%  
Top half  

5%  

Table 4   

2018  

95.92  
3.70  
(4.9)%  
(1.0)%  

Financial performance  

Overview  

2022 vs. 2021 
Net income of $15,807 million was down $243 million or 2% from last year. Diluted EPS of $11.06 was flat and ROE of 16.4% was 
down 220 bps. Our CET1 ratio was 12.6%, down 110 bps from last year. 

Our earnings reflect lower results in Capital Markets and Insurance, partially offset by higher earnings in Personal & 
Commercial Banking, Wealth Management, and Investor & Treasury Services. The current year also reflects lower releases of 
provisions on performing loans. 

For further details on our business segment results and CET1 ratio, refer to the Business segment results and Capital 

management sections, respectively. 

24

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Impact of foreign currency translation  

The following table reflects the estimated impact of foreign currency translation on key income statement items: 

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except per share amounts)  

Increase (decrease):  

Total revenue  
PCL  
Non-interest expense  
Income taxes  
Net income  

Impact on EPS  

Basic  
Diluted  

The relevant average exchange rates that impact our business are shown in the following table: 

(Average foreign currency equivalent of C$1.00) (1)  

U.S. dollar  
British pound  
Euro  

(1) 

Average amounts are calculated using month-end spot rates for the period. 

Total revenue  

  

  

  

Table 5  

2022 vs. 2021  

$ 

$ 

  
165  
3  
72  
8  
82  

  
0.06  
0.06  

Table 6   

2021  

0.796  
0.579  
0.668  

2022  

0.774  
0.618  
0.727  

$

$

$ 

Table 7   

2022  
40,771   $
18,054  

22,717   $
1.48%  

2021  

28,145  
8,143  

20,002  
1.48%  

3,510   $
926  
7,610  
4,289  
1,481  
1,976  
2,058  
1,038  
1,203  
1,512  
43  
110  
512  

5,600  
1,183  
7,132  
4,251  
1,538  
1,858  
2,692  
1,066  
1,078  
1,530  
145  
130  
1,488  

$

$

26,268   $

29,691  

48,985   $

49,693  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts)  

Interest and dividend income  
Interest expense  

Net interest income  
NIM  

Insurance premiums, investment and fee income  
Trading revenue  
Investment management and custodial fees  
Mutual fund revenue  
Securities brokerage commissions  
Service charges  
Underwriting and other advisory fees  
Foreign exchange revenue, other than trading  
Card service revenue  
Credit fees  
Net gains on investment securities  
Share of profit in joint ventures and associates  
Other  

Non-interest income  

Total revenue  

2022 vs. 2021 
Total revenue decreased $708 million or 1% from last year, largely due to lower insurance premiums, investment and fee income 
(Insurance revenue) and other revenue. Lower underwriting and other advisory fees and trading revenue also contributed to the 
decrease. These factors were partially offset by higher net interest income and investment management and custodial fees. 

Net interest income increased $2,715 million or 14%, primarily due to average volume growth and higher spreads in Canadian 

Banking and Wealth Management. 

offset by spread compression in repo products. 

NIM remained flat, as the benefit to our Canadian Banking and Wealth Management segments from rising interest rates was 

Insurance revenue decreased $2,090 million or 37%, mainly due to the change in fair value of investments backing 
policyholder liabilities and lower group annuity sales, both of which are largely offset in PBCAE. These factors were partially 
offset by business growth in Canadian Insurance across the majority of our products. 

Investment management and custodial fees increased $478 million or 7%, primarily driven by higher average fee-based client 

assets reflecting net sales. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

25 

Trading revenue decreased $257 million or 22%, mainly due to the impact from loan underwriting markdowns, primarily in the 

U.S., largely driven by challenging market conditions. 

Underwriting and other advisory fees decreased $634 million or 24%, mainly attributable to lower debt and equity origination 

across most regions. 

Other revenue decreased $976 million or 66%, primarily attributable to changes in the fair value of the hedges related to our 

U.S. share-based compensation plans, which was largely offset in Non-interest expense. 

Additional trading information 

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Net interest income (1)  
Non-interest income  

Total trading revenue  

Total trading revenue by product  

Interest rate and credit  
Equities  
Foreign exchange and commodities  

Total trading revenue  

Table 8   

2021 (2)  
2,230  
1,183  

3,413  

  
1,904  
935  
574  

3,413  

2022  

2,024   $
926  

2,950   $

  

1,147   $
951  
852  

2,950   $

$

$

$

$

(1) 

(2) 

Reflects net interest income arising from trading-related positions, including assets and liabilities that are classified or 
designated at fair value through profit or loss (FVTPL). 
Amounts have been revised from those previously presented. 

2022 vs. 2021 
Total trading revenue of $2,950 million, which is comprised of trading-related revenue recorded in Net interest income and 
Non-interest income, decreased $463 million or 14% from last year, mainly due to the impact from loan underwriting markdowns, 
primarily in the U.S., largely driven by challenging market conditions. 

Provision for credit losses (1)  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts)  

Personal & Commercial Banking  
Wealth Management  
Capital Markets  
Corporate Support and other (2)  

PCL on performing loans  

Personal & Commercial Banking  
Wealth Management  
Capital Markets  
Corporate Support and other (2)  

PCL on impaired loans  

PCL – Loans  
PCL – Other financial assets (3)  

Total PCL  

PCL on loans is comprised of:  

Retail  
Wholesale  

Retail  
Wholesale  

PCL on performing loans  

PCL on impaired loans  

PCL – Loans  

Table 9   

For the year ended   

$

October 31  
2022  
(281)   $
21  
(22)  
1  

October 31  
2021  
(899)  
(32)  
(414)  
(5)  

(281)  

(1,350)  

$

755   $

13  
13  
(3)  

778  

497  
(13)  

(250)  

(281)  

648  
130  

778  

$

$

484   $

  
(31)   $

731  
(14)  
(39)  
–  

678  

(672)  
(81)  

(753)  

  
(684)  
(666)  

(1,350)  

604  
74  

678  

$

497   $

(672)  

PCL on loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances  

0.06%  

(0.10)%  

PCL on impaired loans as a % of average net loans and  

acceptances  

0.10%  

0.10%  

(1) 
(2) 
(3) 

Information on loans represents loans, acceptance and commitments. 
Includes PCL recorded in Corporate Support, Insurance and Investor & Treasury Services. 
PCL on other financial assets mainly represents provisions on debt securities measured at FVOCI and amortized cost, 
accounts receivable and financial guarantees. 

26

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

2022 vs. 2021 
Total PCL was $484 million compared to $(753) million last year, primarily reflecting lower releases of provisions on performing 
loans in Personal & Commercial Banking and Capital Markets. The PCL on loans ratio increased 16 bps. 

PCL on performing loans was $(281) million, compared to $(1,350) million last year, primarily in Personal & Commercial 
Banking and Capital Markets, reflecting the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic in both 2022 and 2021. The releases in the 
current year were partially offset by unfavourable changes in our macroeconomic outlook. 

PCL on impaired loans increased $100 million or 15%, mainly reflecting recoveries last year as compared to provisions taken 
in the current year in Capital Markets and Wealth Management, as well as higher provisions in Personal & Commercial Banking. 

Insurance policyholder benefits, claims and acquisition expense (PBCAE)  

2022 vs. 2021 
PBCAE of $1,783 million decreased $2,108 million or 54% from last year, mainly reflecting the change in fair value of investments 
backing policyholder liabilities and lower group annuity sales, both of which are largely offset in revenue. Higher favourable 
investment-related experience and favourable annual actuarial assumption updates in the current year largely related to 
economic assumptions also contributed to the decrease. These factors were partially offset by the impact of lower new longevity 
reinsurance contracts, as well as business growth in Canadian Insurance. 

Non-interest expense  

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts)  

Salaries  
Variable compensation  
Benefits and retention compensation  
Share-based compensation  

Human resources  
Equipment  
Occupancy  
Communications  
Professional fees  
Amortization of other intangibles  
Other  

Non-interest expense  
Efficiency ratio (1)  
Efficiency ratio adjusted (2)  

Table 10   

$

2022  

7,251   $
7,127  
2,015  
135  

16,528  
2,099  
1,554  
1,082  
1,511  
1,369  
2,466  
$ 26,609   $
54.3%  
52.3%  

2021  
6,724  
7,145  
2,053  
617  

16,539  
1,986  
1,584  
931  
1,351  
1,287  
2,246  

25,924  
52.2%  
52.2%  

(1) 
(2) 

Efficiency ratio is calculated as Non-interest expense divided by Total revenue. 
This is a non-GAAP ratio. This measure has been adjusted by excluding the change in fair value of investments backing 
policyholder liabilities from total revenue. For further details, refer to the Key performance and non-GAAP measures 
section. 

2022 vs. 2021 
Non-interest expense increased $685 million or 3% from last year, mainly due to higher staff and technology related costs as well 
as increased marketing costs and other discretionary spend. These factors were partially offset by the change in the fair value of 
our U.S share-based compensation plans, which was largely offset in Other revenue. 

Our efficiency ratio of 54.3% increased 210 bps from last year. Excluding the change in fair value of investments backing 

policyholder liabilities, our efficiency ratio of 52.3% increased 10 bps from last year. 

Efficiency ratio excluding the change in fair value of investments backing policyholder liabilities is a non-GAAP ratio. For further 
details, including a reconciliation, refer to the Key performance and non-GAAP measures section. 

Income and other taxes  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts)  

Income taxes  
Other taxes  

Value added and sales taxes  
Payroll taxes  
Capital taxes  
Property taxes  
Insurance premium taxes  
Business taxes  

Total income and other taxes  
Income before income taxes  
Effective income tax rate  

Effective total tax rate (1)  

2022  

$

4,302   $

  
508  
871  
90  
129  
31  
72  

1,701  
6,003   $
$
$ 20,109   $
21.4%  

27.5%  

Table 11   

2021  
4,581  
  
443  
810  
73  
140  
31  
39  

1,536  

6,117  
20,631  
22.2%  

27.6%  

(1) 

Total income and other taxes as a percentage of income before income taxes and other taxes. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

27 

2022 vs. 2021 
Income tax expense decreased $279 million or 6% from last year, primarily due to lower income before income taxes, an increase 
in income from lower tax rate jurisdictions and higher tax-exempt income in the current year. 

The effective income tax rate of 21.4% decreased 80 bps, primarily due to higher tax-exempt income and an increase in 

income from lower tax rate jurisdictions in the current year. 

Other taxes increased $165 million or 11% from last year, mainly due to higher value added and sales taxes commensurate 

with increased purchase activity, higher payroll taxes driven by higher staff-related costs, as well as an increase in business 
taxes. 

Client assets  

Assets under administration 
AUA are assets administered by us which are beneficially owned by our clients. We provide services that are administrative in 
nature, including safekeeping, collecting investment income, settling purchase and sale transactions, and record keeping. 
Underlying investment strategies within AUA are determined by our clients and generally do not impact the administrative fees 
that we receive. Administrative fees can be impacted by factors such as asset valuation level changes from market movements, 
types of services administered, transaction volumes, geography and client relationship pricing based on volumes or multiple 
services. 

Our Investor & Treasury Services business is the primary business segment that has AUA with approximately 69% of total 

AUA, as at October 31, 2022, followed by our Wealth Management and Personal & Commercial Banking businesses with 
approximately 25% and 6% of total AUA, respectively. 

2022 vs. 2021 
AUA decreased $698 billion or 11% from last year, primarily due to unfavourable market conditions, partially offset by increased 
client activity in Investor & Treasury Services, the impact of foreign exchange translation and the inclusion of our acquisition of 
Brewin Dolphin in Wealth Management. 

The following table summarizes AUA by geography and asset class: 

AUA by geographic mix and asset class  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Canada (1)  

Money market  
Fixed income  
Equity  
Multi-asset and other  

Total Canada  

U.S. (1)  

Money market  
Fixed income  
Equity  
Multi-asset and other  

Total U.S.  

Other International (1)  

Money market  
Fixed income  
Equity  
Multi-asset and other  

Total International  

Total AUA  

2022  

  

$

43,200   $

735,800  
734,000  
1,006,300  

2,519,300  

2,746,900  

Table 12   

2021  

  
42,700  
772,400  
781,400  
1,150,400  

  
49,800  
90,400  
256,000  
324,600  

720,800  

  
32,800  
308,200  
865,000  
1,673,600  

  
40,700  
116,000  
246,300  
304,300  

707,300  

  
38,200  
252,700  
636,600  
1,495,600  

2,423,100  

2,879,600  

$ 5,649,700   $ 6,347,300  

(1)  Geographic information is based on the location from where our clients are serviced. 

Assets under management 
AUM are assets managed by us which are beneficially owned by our clients. Management fees are paid by the investment funds 
and other clients for the investment capabilities of an investment manager and can also cover administrative services. 
Management fees may be calculated daily, monthly or quarterly as a percentage of the AUM, depending on the distribution 
channel, product and investment strategies. In general, equity strategies carry a higher fee rate than fixed income or money 
market strategies. Fees are also impacted by asset mix and relationship pricing for clients using multiple services. Higher risk 
assets generally produce higher fees, while clients using multiple services can take advantage of synergies which reduce the fees 
they are charged. Certain funds may have performance fee arrangements where fees are recorded when certain benchmarks or 
performance targets are achieved. These factors could lead to differences in fees earned by product and therefore net return by 
asset class may vary despite similar average AUM. Our Wealth Management segment is the primary business segment that has 
AUM with approximately 99% of total AUM as at October 31, 2022. 

2022 vs. 2021 
AUM decreased $9 billion or 1% from last year, primarily due to unfavourable market conditions, partially offset by the inclusion 
of our acquisition of Brewin Dolphin, the impact of foreign exchange translation and net sales. 

28

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

The following table presents the change in AUM for the year ended October 31, 2022: 

Client assets – AUM  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

AUM, beginning balance  
Institutional inflows  
Institutional outflows  
Personal flows, net  

Total net flows  

Market impact  
Acquisition/dispositions  
Foreign exchange  

Table 13   

  

2021  

2022  

Multi-asset  
and other  

Money market   Fixed income  

Equity  

Total     

Total  

$

43,500   $ 235,400   $ 137,600   $ 592,200   $ 1,008,700     $

100,000  
(107,300)  
(700)  

(8,000)  
200  
–  
2,100  

42,900  
(48,900)  
(2,900)  

(8,900)  
(27,400)  
–  
(1,300)  

16,100  
(10,600)  
2,000  

7,500  
(18,100)  
–  
2,900  

16,600  
(13,200)  
23,000  

26,400  
(72,100)  
58,500  
29,200  

175,600    
(180,000)    
21,400    

17,000    
(117,400)    
58,500    
32,900    

843,600  
98,000  
(73,700)  
51,500  

75,800  
123,800  
(4,500)  
(30,000)  

Total market, acquisition/dispositions  

and foreign exchange impact  

2,300  

(28,700)  

(15,200)  

15,600  

(26,000)    

89,300  

AUM, balance at end of year  

$

37,800   $ 197,800   $ 129,900   $ 634,200   $

999,700     $ 1,008,700  

Business segment results  

Results by business segments  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars,  
except percentage amounts)  

Personal &  
Commercial  
Banking  

Wealth  

Management   Insurance  

Capital  
Markets (1)  

Corporate  
Support (1)  

Net interest income   $
Non-interest income  

14,019   $
6,124  

3,634   $

–   $

11,215  

3,510  

498   $

1,725  

4,698   $
4,422  

(132)  $
(728)  

Total revenue  

PCL  
PBCAE  
Non-interest expense  

20,143  
463  
–  
8,437  

14,849  
34  
–  
10,701  

3,510  
–  
1,783  
588  

2,223  
(3)  
–  
1,569  

9,120  
(11)  
–  
5,561  

(860)  
1  
–  
(247)  

2022  

Investor &  
Treasury  
Services  

Table 14   

  

2021  

Total     

22,717    $
26,268    

48,985    
484    
1,783    
26,609    

Total  

20,002  
29,691  

49,693  
(753)  
3,891  
25,924  

Income before  
income taxes  

Income taxes  

11,243  
2,873  

4,114  
970  

1,139  
282  

657  
144  

3,570  
649  

(614)  
(616)  

20,109    
4,302    

20,631  
4,581  

Net income  

$

8,370   $

3,144   $

857   $

513   $

2,921   $

2   $

15,807    $

16,050  

ROE (2)  

30.9%  

16.5%  

36.4%  

16.4%  

11.3%  

n.m.  

16.4%    

18.6%  

Average assets  

$ 575,900   $ 158,100   $ 22,500   $ 250,600   $ 824,800   $ 55,000   $ 1,886,900    $ 1,678,200  

(1) 

Net interest income, Non-interest income, Total revenue, Income before income taxes, and Income taxes are presented in Capital Markets on a taxable equivalent basis 
(teb). The teb adjustment is eliminated in the Corporate Support segment. For a further discussion, refer to the How we measure and report our business segments 
section. 
For further details, refer to the Key performance and non-GAAP measures section. 

(2) 
n.m.  not meaningful 

How we measure and report our business segments  

Our management reporting framework is intended to measure the performance of each business segment as if it were a stand-
alone business and reflects the way that the business segment is managed. This approach is intended to ensure that our 
business segments’ results include all applicable revenue and expenses associated with the conduct of their business and 
depicts how management views those results. 

Key methodologies 
The following outlines the key methodologies and assumptions used in our management reporting framework. These are 
periodically reviewed by management to ensure they remain valid. 

Expense and tax allocation 
To ensure that our business segments’ results include expenses associated with the conduct of their business, we allocate costs 
incurred or services provided by Technology & Operations and Functions, which are directly undertaken or provided on the 
business segments’ behalf. For other costs not directly attributable to our business segments, including overhead costs and 
other indirect expenses, we use our management reporting framework for allocating these costs to each business segment in a 
manner that is intended to reflect the underlying benefits. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

29 

Capital attribution 
Our management reporting framework also determines the attribution of capital to our business segments in a manner that is 
intended to consistently measure and align economic costs with the underlying benefits and risks associated with the activities 
of each business segment. The amount of capital assigned to each business segment is referred to as attributed capital. 
Unattributed capital and associated amounts are reported in Corporate Support. For further information, refer to the Capital 
management section. 

Funds transfer pricing 
Funds transfer pricing refers to the pricing of intra-company borrowing or lending for management reporting purposes. We 
employ a funds transfer pricing process to enable risk-adjusted management reporting of segment results. This process 
determines the costs and revenue for intra-company borrowing and lending of funds after taking into consideration our interest 
rate risk and liquidity risk management objectives, as well as applicable regulatory requirements. 

Provisions for credit losses 
PCL is recorded to recognize expected credit losses on all financial assets, except for financial assets classified or designated as 
FVTPL and equity securities designated as FVOCI, which are not subject to impairment assessment. For details on our accounting 
policy on Allowance for credit losses (ACL), refer to Note 2 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

PCL is included in the results of each business segment to fully reflect the appropriate expenses related to the conduct of 

each business segment. 

In addition to the key methodologies described above, the following components of our management reporting framework also 
impact how our business segments are managed and reported: 
(cid:129) Wealth Management results include disclosure in U.S. dollars, primarily for U.S. Wealth Management (including City 

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

National) as we review and manage the results of this business largely in this currency. 
Capital Markets results are reported on a teb basis, which grosses up total revenue from certain tax-advantaged sources 
(Canadian taxable corporate dividends and the U.S. tax credit investment business) to their effective taxable equivalent 
value with a corresponding offset recorded in the provision for income taxes. We record the elimination of the teb 
adjustments in Corporate Support. We believe these adjustments are useful and reflect how Capital Markets manages its 
business, since it enhances the comparability of revenue and related ratios across taxable revenue and our principal 
tax-advantaged sources of revenue. The use of teb adjustments and measures may not be comparable to similar GAAP 
measures or similarly adjusted amounts disclosed by other financial institutions. 
Corporate Support results include all enterprise level activities that are undertaken for the benefit of the organization that 
are not allocated to our five business segments, such as certain treasury and liquidity management activities, including 
amounts associated with unattributed capital, and consolidation adjustments, including the elimination of the teb gross-up 
amounts. In addition, we record gains (losses) on economic hedges of our U.S. Wealth Management (including City National) 
share-based compensation plans, which are reflected in revenue, and related variability in share-based compensation 
expense driven by changes in the fair value of liabilities relating to these plans in Corporate Support as we believe this 
presentation more closely aligns with how we view business performance and manage the underlying risks. 

Key performance and non-GAAP measures  

Performance measures 
We measure and evaluate the performance of our consolidated operations and each business segment using a number of 
financial metrics, such as net income and ROE. Certain financial metrics, including ROE, do not have a standardized meaning 
under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and may not be comparable to similar measures disclosed by other 
financial institutions. 

Return on common equity 
We use ROE, at both the consolidated and business segment levels, as a measure of return on total capital invested in our 
business. Management views the business segment ROE measure as a useful measure for supporting investment and resource 
allocation decisions because it adjusts for certain items that may affect comparability between business segments and certain 
competitors. 

Our consolidated ROE calculation is based on net income available to common shareholders divided by total average 
common equity for the period. Business segment ROE calculations are based on net income available to common shareholders 
divided by average attributed capital for the period. For each segment, average attributed capital includes the capital required to 
underpin various risks as described in the Capital management section and amounts invested in goodwill and intangibles. 

The attribution of capital involves the use of assumptions, judgments and methodologies that are regularly reviewed and 
revised by management as deemed necessary. Changes to such assumptions, judgments and methodologies can have a material 
effect on the business segment ROE information that we report. Other companies that disclose information on similar 
attributions and related return measures may use different assumptions, judgments and methodologies. 

30

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

  

  

  

Calculation of ROE  

(Millions of Canadian dollars,  
except percentage amounts)  

Net income available to  

Total average common  

equity (1), (2)  

ROE (3)  

Personal &  
Commercial  
Banking  

Wealth  

Management   Insurance  

Capital  
Markets  

Corporate  
Support  

Total    

Total  

2022  

Investor &  
Treasury  
Services  

Table 15   

2021  

common shareholders   $

8,287   $

3,096   $

851   $

505   $ 2,855   $

(47)  $ 15,547    $ 15,781  

26,800  

30.9%  

18,800  

2,350  

3,100   25,350  

18,300  

94,700     84,850  

16.5%  

36.4%  

16.4%  

11.3%  

n.m.  

16.4%    

18.6%  

Total average common equity represents rounded figures. 
The amounts for the segments are referred to as attributed capital. 

(1) 
(2) 
(3)  ROE is based on actual balances of average common equity before rounding. 
n.m.  not meaningful 

Non-GAAP measures 
We believe that certain non-GAAP measures described below are more reflective of our ongoing operating results and provide 
readers with a better understanding of management’s perspective on our performance. These measures also enhance the 
comparability of our financial performance for the year ended October 31, 2022 with the results from last year. Non-GAAP 
measures (including non-GAAP ratios) do not have a standardized meaning under GAAP and may not be comparable to similar 
measures disclosed by other financial institutions. 

The following discussion describes the non-GAAP measures we use in evaluating our operating results. 

Adjusted efficiency ratio 
Our efficiency ratio is impacted by the change in fair value of investments backing policyholder liabilities, which is reported in 
revenue and largely offset in PBCAE. The adjusted efficiency ratio is a non-GAAP ratio and is calculated using adjusted total 
revenue, which is a non-GAAP measure as it excludes the impact from the change in fair value of investments backing 
policyholder liabilities. We believe the adjusted efficiency ratio is a useful measure as changes in the fair value of investments 
backing policyholder liabilities can lead to volatility in total revenue that could obscure trends in underlying business 
performance and reduce comparability with prior periods. 

Consolidated non-GAAP efficiency ratio  

Table 16   

  

Item excluded  

  

  

Item excluded  

  

2022  

2021  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars,  
except percentage amounts)  

Total revenue  
Non-interest expense  

Efficiency ratio  

Change in fair value  
of investments backing  
policyholder liabilities  

As reported  

$ 48,985   $
26,609  

54.3%  

Adjusted      As reported  

1,888  
–  

$ 50,873     $ 49,693   $

26,609    

25,924  

  

52.3%    

52.2%  

Change in fair value  
of investments backing  
policyholder liabilities  

Adjusted  

$ 49,706  
25,924  

52.2%  

13  
–  

  

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

31 

Personal & Commercial Banking  

Personal & Commercial Banking provides a broad suite of financial products and services to individuals and businesses for their 
day-to-day banking, investing and financing needs. We are focused on building deep and meaningful relationships with our 
clients, underscored by the delivery of exceptional client experiences, the breadth of our product suite, our depth of expertise, 
and the features of our digital solutions. 

> 14 million  

Number of Canadian Banking clients  

   #1 or #2  
   Ranking in market share for all key  
retail and business products  

   38,450  
   Employees  

Revenue by business lines  

$20.1 billion
Total revenue

 70%  Personal Banking

 26%  Business Banking
  4%  Caribbean and U.S. Banking  

  
  

  

  

  
  
   We operate through two businesses – Canadian Banking and Caribbean & U.S.  
Banking. Canadian Banking serves our home market in Canada. We have the  
largest branch network, the most ATMs, one of the largest mobile sales forces  
across Canada along with market-leading digital capabilities. In Caribbean &  
U.S. Banking, we offer a broad range of financial products and services in  
targeted markets.  

  

In Canada, we compete with other Schedule 1 banks, independent trust  
companies, foreign banks, credit unions, caisses populaires, auto financing  
companies, as well as emerging entrants to the financial services industry.  

In the Caribbean, our competition includes banks, trust companies and  
investment management companies serving retail and corporate clients, as well  
as public institutions. In the U.S., we compete primarily with other Canadian  
banking institutions that have U.S. operations.  

  

  

  

  

2022 Operating environment 
› In the early part of the fiscal year, the operating environment continued to be impacted by COVID-19 related restrictions; 

however, it was buffered in part by low unemployment levels, sustained GDP growth and government support. As restrictions 
eased during the year, client activity improved, driving solid revenue growth in fiscal 2022. 

› In response to rising inflation, the BoC raised the benchmark interest rate by 350 basis points from March 2022 to October 2022. 
As a result of the rising interest rate environment, we saw NIM expansion in fiscal 2022, reversing the decline in the prior year. 
The combination of strong volumes and higher NIM translated to significant growth in net interest income. 

› While the credit environment in fiscal 2022 reflected a recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, it also reflected unfavourable 

changes in our economic outlook towards the latter half of the year, including the impact of slowing economic growth as well 
as rising inflation and interest rates. PCL on impaired loans remained well below pre-pandemic levels. 

› As a result of the rising rate environment, housing activity has slowed and household debt servicing costs increased. In the 

latter half of the year, we saw mortgage originations below prior year levels. 

› Personal and business deposits continued to see significant growth in the first half of the year as COVID-19 related disruptions 

persisted; however, as a result of the economy re-opening and robust client activity, as well as the impact from Bank of 
Canada’s monetary policy, deposit growth decelerated in the latter half of the fiscal year but remained well above pre-
pandemic levels. 

› In fiscal 2022, we saw unfavourable market conditions driving mutual fund balances lower from both market depreciation and 
net redemptions. We also saw a decline in client activity in our Direct Investing business from elevated levels in the previous 
year. 

› Client preferences for digital offerings are evolving and we continue to invest in digital solutions to improve the client 

experience and deliver personalized advice. 

› Our Caribbean Banking business was favourably impacted by the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, reflecting higher client 

activity. We also saw releases of provisions on performing and impaired loans. 

› In the U.S., earnings were favourably impacted by the rising interest rate environment and the increase in cross-border travel, 

as most restrictions related to COVID-19 were lifted. 

32

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

OUR STRATEGY  

PROGRESS IN 2022  

PRIORITIES IN 2023  

Strategic priorities 

Transform sales, advice and  
services  

Provide flexibility by continuing to deliver anytime,  
anywhere solutions to our clients across all channels,  
seamlessly integrating mobile and digital services into  
our clients’ lives  

Continue to reimagine our branch network to meet the  
evolving needs of our clients  

Expand our expert advisor network to support clients  
with complex advice needs  

Continue to focus on opportunities to support  
businesses and retail clients in their transition to net  
zero, including building upon our existing portfolio of  
products, services and advice  

Continue to utilize and transform our joint venture  
Moneris to deliver a leading merchant platform  

Evolved our branch network by opening new format  
branches and investing in upgrading existing  
locations with the objective of enhancing the client  
experience, allowing clients to engage in deeper  
conversations with our advisors and enabling them to  
complete more transactions digitally  

Continued to create capacity and capability to focus on  
advice, complex servicing and sales, all underpinned by  
innovation across our distribution network  

Leveraged our industry-leading Canadian mobile app to  
revolutionize the mobile client experience through  
personalization and value-added client insights  

Continued to tailor advice and insights to the individual  
to help clients manage their finances through the NOMI  
suite of capabilities, including NOMI Insights®, NOMI  
Find & Save® that uses predictive technology to help  
clients save, and NOMI® Forecast that provides a  
seven-day forecast of clients’ future cash flow  

In May 2022, Retail Banker International awarded RBC  
with the Best Global Retail Bank and Best Bank for  
Small & Medium-Sized enterprises (SMEs) awards,  
recognizing the Bank’s success in respect of its retail  
banking profits, world-class cost-income ratio,  
continued market share gains and exceptional client  
base  

In October 2022, J.D. Power Canada ranked RBC the  
highest in Customer Satisfaction among Big 5 Banks for  
the third consecutive year from the J.D. Power 2022  
Canada Retail Banking Satisfaction Study  

In November 2021, RBC was awarded the Best Payments  
Innovation Award from The Digital Banker as part of the  
Global Retail Banking Innovation Awards 2021  

Leveraged our existing product portfolio to support our  
clients’ transition to net zero, including lending such as  
electric and hybrid vehicles and energy retrofit loans,  
and ESG investment products including market-linked  
ESG GIC, InvestEase® responsible investing portfolio  
and RBC Vision funds  

Continued to grow our national cleantech practice  
through RBCx and worked with a number of cleantech  
ecosystem partners to identify and overcome the  
hurdles to commercialization of cleantech solutions  

Since the launch of the full product offering in August  
2021, Mydoh has reached 100,000 Canadian parents and  
children and is experiencing very high engagement  

Continued to provide superior working capital solutions  
to our business clients through RBC PayEdgeTM  
platform  

Lead with RBC VantageTM, a program that allows clients  
to unlock rewards, savings, insights and more with any  
eligible bank account. Approximately 2 million clients  
signed up for RBC Vantage since launch and we’ve  
delivered millions in fee rebates and over 1 billion RBC  
Avion® points  

Launched Vantage SnapshotTM that provides clients  
with a personalized picture of the cumulative savings  
and benefits they’ve received with their RBC bank  
accounts and highlights opportunities for clients to  
earn and save more – all in one spot  

Launched our next-generation loyalty program, Avion  
RewardsTM, that provides Canadians with more ways to  
shop, earn, save and redeem with innovative shopping  
features, best-in-class cash back deals and offers, and  
more ways to pay with points  

Maintained our focus on key high-growth and high-
value segments such as retirees, youth, newcomers,  
business owners, high net worth clients, and healthcare  
professionals  

Entered into a collaboration agreement with ICICI Bank  
Canada to focus on building banking solutions that  
simplify the financial transition for newcomers from the  
time they choose Canada to their arrival and beyond  

Accelerate our growth  

Ownr® has launched more than 32,800 new Canadian  
businesses, driving close to 21,600 small business RBC  
bank accounts this year  

Continue to build a suite of best-in-class value  
propositions, digital experiences and Beyond Banking  
ventures to accelerate client acquisition  

Engage Canadians earlier, more often and in more  
compelling ways  

Focus on engaging key high-growth client segments and  
enabling our advisors to build new and deeper  
relationships with the objective of achieving industry-
leading volume growth  

Establish additional key partnerships to continue to  
add value for our clients  

Enable unparalleled value for both consumers and  
merchants through best-in-class loyalty program  

Focus on increasing employee engagement and  
continue to build a future-ready workforce  

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

33 

OUR STRATEGY  

PROGRESS IN 2022  

PRIORITIES IN 2023  

Digitize to unlock productivity  

Achieved 11% year over year growth in number of  
mobile users  

Recognized with the J.D. Power Canada award for “Best  
in Customer Satisfaction” for our mobile banking app.  
The recognition comes from the J.D. Power 2022  
Canadian Banking Mobile App Satisfaction Study  

Continued to invest in solutions that simplify, digitize  
and automate experiences for clients and employees,  
and enable employees to deliver relevant and expert  
advice, such as our market-leading MyAdvisor®  
personalized planning capability  

Enhanced digital experience for our small business and  
commercial clients and made it easier for them to  
transact with us  

Entered into agreements with Plaid and Envestnet |  
Yodlee that allow RBC clients to better manage their  
finances and build wealth by securely connecting to  
and sharing their RBC financial information with  
thousands of third-party applications  

Accelerated actions focused on enhancing the client  
experience underpinned by programs across growth  
and transformation priorities, including product  
development and digitization  

Despite lingering impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic,  
continued to drive accelerated client and real estate  
financing growth leveraging a competitively  
differentiated value proposition and home-buying  
solution  

Made focused investments to digitize client and  
internal processes within real estate financing,  
improving process robustness and control automation,  
and expanding targeted discounts and offers of value to  
the cross-border lifestyle  

Deliver more personalized insights to improve the  
client experience while continuing to simplify and  
digitize everyday banking  

Lead in mobile capabilities and enable fulfillment of  
servicing through digital channels with access to  
advisors to help clients on their chosen path  

Invest in new tools and capabilities and proactively  
seek ways to streamline internal processes and the  
client experience  

Accelerate adoption of business agility and deliver  
faster, smarter and higher quality products and  
solutions  

Continue focus on modernizing data and technology;  
enhancing the client experience by digitizing and  
simplifying day to day banking; and developing and  
accelerating key programs to enable employees for  
success and accelerate growth  

Continue driving accelerated growth momentum  
through deeper integration to increase market share of  
Canadian purchasers of U.S. real estate and new-to-
RBC relationship acquisition  

Expand digitally enabled client experiences to extend  
competitive differentiation and drive industry leading  
client satisfaction, while accelerating automation of  
operational processes and controls to enhance  
scalability  

In the Caribbean  

In the U.S.  

Outlook 

Interest rate hikes by central banks to contain surging inflation are adding to global growth risk in the year ahead. Housing markets in Canada 
have already pulled back significantly since spring in response to increases in interest rates. Labour market conditions are extremely tight with 
demand for workers well outpacing available supply, leading to shortages across regions and sectors. However, as the economic backdrop 
deteriorates we expect job openings will fall and unemployment rates will rise. We expect moderate recessions in the U.S. and Canada in the 
first half of calendar 2023 with consumer spending contracting as higher borrowing costs and prices reduce household purchasing power. We 
expect the economy will begin to grow again in the second half of calendar 2023 with slowing inflation allowing central banks to pause interest 
rate hikes in the coming months. We will continue to pursue industry-leading outcomes and operational efficiency initiatives during uncertain 
times, and channel transformation to achieve our vision of being a digitally-enabled relationship bank. 

The Caribbean’s economic recovery has continued to strengthen in calendar 2022, supported by strong tourism-related travel. However, 
a slowing of the growth momentum is expected in 2023 as major source markets (U.S., U.K., Canada, Europe) are projected to fall into 
recessions. We will continue to focus on growth strategies in our target markets, improving operational efficiency, and adding value for 
our clients. 

For further details on our general economic review and outlook, refer to the Economic, market and regulatory review and outlook section. 

34

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Personal & Commercial Banking  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts and as otherwise noted)  

Net interest income  
Non-interest income  

Total revenue  

PCL on performing assets  
PCL on impaired assets  

PCL  

Non-interest expense  

Income before income taxes  
Net income  

Revenue by business  
Canadian Banking  

Personal Banking  
Business Banking  

Caribbean & U.S. Banking  

Key ratios  

ROE  
NIM  
Efficiency ratio  
Operating leverage (1)  

Selected balance sheet information  

Average total assets  
Average total earning assets, net  
Average loans and acceptances, net  
Average deposits  

Other information  

AUA (2), (3)  
Average AUA  
AUM (3)  
Number of employees (FTE)  

Credit information  

Net income  
NIM  
Efficiency ratio  
Operating leverage  

$ 

$

$

$

$

$

2022  
14,019   $
6,124  
20,143  
(283)  
746  
463  
8,437  
11,243  

8,370   $

  

19,282   $
13,957  
5,325  
861  

  
30.9%  
2.55%  
41.9%  
4.0%  

575,900   $
548,900  
553,300  
552,100  

336,400   $
355,600  
5,600  
38,450  

  
0.14%  

  

  

  

8,024   $
2.54%  
40.5%  
3.8%  

Table 17   

2021  

12,621  
5,725  
18,346  
(909)  
722  
(187)  
7,978  
10,555  
7,847  

  
17,570  
13,337  
4,233  
776  

  
32.0%  
2.51%  
43.5%  
3.1%  

  
527,100  
502,000  
505,600  
504,300  

  
367,700  
340,800  
5,400  
36,675  

  
0.14%  

  
7,620  
2.50%  
42.0%  
2.9%  

PCL on impaired loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances  

Other selected information – Canadian Banking  

See Glossary for composition of this measure. 
AUA includes securitized residential mortgages and credit card loans as at October 31, 2022 of $15 billion and $6 billion, respectively (October 31, 2021 – $15 billion and $3 billion). 

(1) 
(2) 
(3)  Represents year-end spot balances. 

Financial performance 
2022 vs. 2021 
Net income increased $523 million or 7% from last year, primarily attributable to higher net interest income, driven by average 
volume growth of 9% in Canadian Banking and higher spreads. Higher non-interest income also contributed to the increase. 
These factors were partially offset by higher PCL, higher staff and technology related costs, including digital initiatives. 

Total revenue increased $1,797 million or 10%, primarily due to higher net interest income reflecting average volume growth 
in Canadian Banking of 9% in loans and 9% in deposits. Increased client activity contributed to higher foreign exchange revenue, 
card service revenue and service charges. 

NIM increased 4 bps, primarily due to the impact of the rising interest rate environment, partially offset by changes in 

product mix and lower prepayment revenue in our mortgage portfolios. 

PCL was $463 million compared to $(187) million last year. The increase in PCL was primarily attributable to lower releases of 

provisions on performing loans due to unfavourable changes in our macroeconomic outlook in the current year. 

Non-interest expense increased $459 million or 6%, mainly attributable to higher staff and technology related costs, 

including digital initiatives, as well as higher marketing costs. 

Average loans and acceptances increased $48 billion or 9%, mainly driven by growth in residential mortgages and business loans. 
Average deposits increased $48 billion or 9%, reflecting growth in business deposits and personal deposits including 

Guaranteed Investment Certificates (GICs). 

Business line review  

In Canada, we operate through two business lines: Personal Banking and Business Banking. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

35 

Personal Banking  

Personal Banking offers a full range of products focused on meeting the needs of our individual Canadian clients at every stage 
of their lives through a wide range of financing and investment products and services. This includes home equity financing, 
personal lending, chequing and savings accounts, private banking, indirect lending (including auto financing), mutual funds and 
self-directed brokerage accounts, GICs, credit cards, and payment products and solutions. 

We rank #1 or #2 in market share for all key Personal Banking products in Canada supported by the largest retail banking 

network in Canada, with 1,162 branches and 4,028 ATMs. 

Financial performance 
Total revenue increased $620 million or 5% compared to last year, primarily due to higher net interest income reflecting average 
volume growth of 9% and higher interest rates, partially offset by the impact of competitive pricing in our mortgage portfolios. 
Increased client activity also contributed to higher card service revenue, foreign exchange revenue and service charges. These 
factors were partially offset by lower securities brokerage commissions. 

Average residential mortgages increased 11% compared to last year, mainly due to solid, but moderating, housing activity 

Average deposits increased 9% from last year, largely reflecting acquisition of new clients and an increase in activity from 

and mortgage originations. 

existing clients. 

Selected highlights  

Table 18   

Average residential mortgages, loans and deposits 
(Millions of Canadian dollars)

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except number of)  

Total revenue  
Other information  

Average residential mortgages  
Average other loans and acceptances, net  
Average deposits  
Average credit card balances  
Credit card purchase volumes  
Branch mutual fund balances (1)  
Average branch mutual fund balances  
AUA – Self-directed brokerage (1)  

Number as at October 31:  

Branches  
ATMs  

(1) 

Represents year-end spot balances. 

2022  

2021  

75,700  

18,200  

$ 13,957   $ 13,337  
  
  
338,400   305,400  
74,800  
293,500   270,500  
16,600  
162,200   132,400  
178,600   205,500  
194,400   191,300  
127,600   135,900  
  
1,182  
4,032  

  
1,162  
4,028  

350,000

300,000

250,000

200,000

150,000

100,000

50,000

0

Business Banking  

2022

2021

Residential mortgages

Other loans and
acceptances, net

Deposits

Business Banking offers a wide range of lending, leasing, deposit, investment, foreign exchange, cash management, auto dealer 
financing, trade products, and services to small and medium-sized commercial businesses across Canada. With one of the 
largest teams of relationship managers and specialists in the industry, our commitment to client experience and trusted advice 
has earned us leading market share in business lending and deposits. 

Financial performance 
Total revenue increased $1,092 million or 26% compared to last year, primarily due to higher net interest income reflecting higher 
interest rates and average volume growth of 11%. Higher credit fees, service charges and foreign exchange revenue reflecting 
increased client activity also contributed to the increase. 

Average loans and acceptances increased 11% and average deposits increased 11%, mainly due to new account acquisitions 

as well as deepening of our existing client relationships. 

Table 19   

Average loans and acceptances and deposits
(Millions of Canadian dollars)

Selected highlights  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Total revenue  
Other information (average)  
Loans and acceptances, net  
Deposits  

2022  
5,325   $

$

  
110,800  
237,900  

2021  

4,233  
  
99,800  
215,200  

250,000
225,000
200,000
175,000
150,000
125,000
100,000
75,000
50,000
25,000
0

2022

2021

Loans and acceptances, net

Deposits

Caribbean & U.S. Banking  

Our Caribbean Banking business offers a comprehensive suite of banking products and services, as well as international 
financing and trade promotion services through extensive branch, ATM, online, and mobile banking networks. 

Our U.S. Banking business serves the needs of Canadian retail and small business clients providing personalized, 

digitally-enabled cross-border banking solutions enabling a cross-border lifestyle in all 50 states across the U.S. 

36

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

 

 

Financial performance 
Total revenue increased $85 million or 11% from last year, primarily due to higher net interest income reflecting average volume 
growth of 12% and higher spreads. Higher card service revenue reflecting increased client activity also contributed to the 
increase. 

Average loans and acceptances increased 12% and average deposits increased 11% primarily due to increased client activity 

and the impact of foreign exchange translation. 

Selected highlights  

Table 20   

Average loans and deposits (Millions of Canadian dollars)

(Millions of Canadian dollars,  
except number of and percentage amounts)  
Total revenue  
Other information  

$

NIM  
Average loans and acceptances, net  
Average deposits  
AUA (1)  
Average AUA  
AUM (1)  

Number as at October 31:  

Branches  
ATMs  

2022  
861   $
  
2.90%  
10,200  
20,800  
6,500  
6,300  
5,300  
  
38  
269  

2021  
776  
  
2.85%  
9,100  
18,700  
5,700  
5,700  
5,100  
  
38  
271  

22,500
20,000
17,500
15,000
12,500
10,000
7,500
5,000
2,500
0

(1) 

Represents year-end spot balances. 

Wealth Management  

Wealth Management is a global business serving clients in key financial centres. We serve HNW and UHNW individual and 
institutional clients with a comprehensive suite of advice-based solutions and strategies to help them achieve their financial goals. 

$14.8 billion  

Total revenue  

  

Asset under Administration  
(AUA)  

Assets under Management  
(AUM)  

  

  

  

  > 6,100  
   Client-facing advisors  

  > $55 billion  
   AUA net flows  

  
  

2022

2021

Loans and acceptances, net

Deposits

 

  

  
   Our lines of business include Canadian Wealth  

Management, U.S. Wealth Management (including  
City National), Global Asset Management (GAM),  
and International Wealth Management.  

• Canadian Wealth Management is the largest  

full-service wealth advisory business in  
Canada, as measured by AUA, serving HNW and  
UHNW clients  

(cid:129) U.S. Wealth Management (including City  

National) also encompasses our private client  
group (PCG) and clearing and custody (C&C)  
businesses. PCG is the 6th largest full-service  
wealth advisory firm in the U.S., as measured by  
AUA, and City National is a premier U.S. private  
and commercial bank serving HNW, UHNW and  
commercial clients  

(cid:129) GAM is the largest retail mutual fund company  
in Canada as measured by AUM, as well as a  
leading institutional asset manager  

(cid:129) International Wealth Management serves HNW  

and UHNW clients, primarily through key  
financial centres in the U.K., Ireland, the  
Channel Islands and Asia  

  

$1,388 billion
Total AUA

$992 billion
Total AUM

 94%  Personal

  5%  Institutional

  1%  Mutual Funds

  

 49%  Personal

 26%  Mutual Funds

 25%  Institutional

  

  

  

  

  

  

2022 Operating environment 
› Earnings in the current fiscal year were favourably impacted by the rising interest rate environment reflecting rate hikes by the 

Fed, BoC and other central banks, while challenging market conditions unfavourably impacted our fee-based client assets. 
› Our core businesses performed well with continued volume growth in City National and net positive flows of fee-based client 

assets in our wealth advisory businesses reflecting the strength of our business driven by the quality of our advice, the breadth 
of our investment and holistic wealth planning solutions and clients’ trust in our brand. The mutual fund sector has seen a 
slowdown in sales due to the rising interest rate environment and market volatility. 

› We continued to invest in our people and technology to maintain our competitive advantage and increase efficiencies in an 

environment characterized by market volatility, rapidly changing client preferences and increasing regulatory requirements. 

› While the credit environment in fiscal 2022 reflected a recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, it also reflected unfavourable 

changes in our economic outlook towards the latter half of the year, including the impact of slowing economic growth as well 
as rising inflation and interest rates. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

37 

OUR STRATEGY  

PROGRESS IN 2022  

PRIORITIES IN 2023  

Strategic priorities 

In Canada, be the premier service  
provider for HNW and UHNW clients  

In the U.S., become the leading  
private and commercial bank and  
wealth manager in our key markets  

In select global financial centres,  
become the most trusted regional  
private bank  

Further extended our position as industry leader in our  
full-service private wealth business  
Continued to focus on holistic wealth planning, including  
advisor training on intergenerational and business wealth  
transfer  
Continued to expand RBC® Premier Banking to deepen  
banking relationships with Wealth Management clients  
Continued to enhance our digital and data capabilities to  
drive increased client satisfaction and advisor productivity  
Implemented unique capabilities that are becoming  
increasingly important to our client base such as private  
alternative investment products  

Continue to retain and attract top-performing advisors to  
strengthen our talent advantage  
Deliver a differentiated client experience through enriched  
advisor-client interactions and seamless digital experiences  
Deepen client relationships by leveraging the combined  
strengths across other business segments with a focus on the  
business owner client segment  
Continue to invest in digital solutions to streamline and  
simplify the business and improve efficiency and advisor  
productivity  
Renew legacy infrastructure to ensure ongoing resiliency in  
our technology platforms  

Continued to invest in key areas needed to grow our  
U.S. Wealth Management business, including  
substantial financial advisor recruitment, solid  
execution on our technology transformation and  
provided proactive liquidity to our clients via a  
revamped securities-based lending platform  
In City National, we continued to focus on organically  
growing our core-banking business and enhancing our  
risk management and controls foundation  
As part of the Preferred Banking mortgage-led strategy,  
City National launched a pilot mortgage pod program  
designed to attract new clients with a mortgage-led  
strategy  
The National Corporate Banking division, which was  
launched in 2021 to pursue the mid-Corp segment  
(companies with annual revenue from $500 million to  
$2 billion), gained market share in 2022  

Continue to deliver an exceptional client experience for  
targeted HNW, UHNW, middle market, and business  
banking segments  
Leverage the combined strengths within U.S. Wealth  
Management (including City National) and Capital  
Markets to deepen client relationships  
In City National, we will continue to focus on enhancing  
our risk management and compliance capabilities  
across the three lines of defense  
Serve our clients more effectively through a  
technology-driven platform, for example, transforming  
our end-to-end commercial credit journey leveraging a  
new commercial lending platform, strengthening the  
mortgage platform by modernizing technology and  
enhancing our client-facing digital capabilities  
Drive programs to enhance profitability and scalability  
across the organization  

Continued to deliver on successful growth initiatives,  
bringing the full strength and breadth of RBC to our  
clients  
Focused on delivering a differentiated client experience  
by leveraging our global capabilities  
Completed acquisition of Brewin Dolphin, increasing  
our distribution, AUM and client base to position  
ourselves as the third largest wealth manager in the  
U.K.  
In Asia, continued growth momentum achieved through  
the addition of experienced client-facing advisors and  
net new assets  

Focus on growing market share in target markets  
Continue to leverage our global strengths to better  
serve clients  
Continue to deliver an exceptional client experience  
and increase business effectiveness and talent  
capabilities  
Successful integration of RBC Brewin Dolphin to  
enhance client value proposition and consolidate  
position in the U.K. local market  
Focus on growing the business in Asia by attracting  
experienced advisors; enhancing digital and product  
capabilities; and deepening cross-business, global  
collaboration  

In asset management, be a leading,  
diversified asset manager focused on  
global institutional and North  
American retail clients  

Maintained #1 market share in Canadian mutual fund  
AUM  
RBC® iShares strategic alliance maintained #1 market  
share in Canadian ETFs  
RBC GAM investment teams continued to integrate  
material ESG factors into their investment processes  
for applicable investment strategies  

Continue to expand our investment capabilities to meet  
evolving client needs in our target distribution regions  
Continue shift to a more unified asset management  
operating model to take better advantage of enterprise  
and GAM global scale, resources and infrastructure  

Outlook 

The ongoing uncertainty in the macroeconomic environment, including the expectation of further interest rate increases and a 
slowdown in economic growth, will continue to impact markets. 

Despite this uncertainty, we believe our diversified businesses remain well-positioned to continue growing our leading 
position in Canada and increasing our market share in the HNW and UHNW client segments globally, leveraging the strength of 
our brand, reputation and solid financial position. Our strategy remains unchanged as we continue to focus on delivering an 
unmatched client experience through holistic goals-based advice, attracting and retaining top-performing advisors, and 
collaborating across the enterprise to bring the full breadth of our capabilities to our clients. We will continue to invest in our 
people and technology to improve client and advisor experiences, drive operational efficiencies, and further strengthen our risk, 
compliance and controls infrastructure to meet heightened regulatory requirements. 

For further details on our general economic review and outlook, refer to the Economic, market and regulatory review and outlook 
section. 

38

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except number of, percentage amounts and as otherwise noted)  

Wealth Management  

Net interest income  
Non-interest income  

Total revenue  

PCL on performing assets  
PCL on impaired assets  

PCL  

Non-interest expense  

Income before income taxes  
Net income  

Revenue by business  

Key ratios  

ROE  
NIM  
Pre-tax margin (1)  

Selected balance sheet information  

Average total assets  
Average total earning assets, net  
Average loans and acceptances, net  
Average deposits  

Other information  

Canadian Wealth Management  
U.S. Wealth Management (including City National)  

U.S. Wealth Management (including City National) (US$ millions)  

Global Asset Management  
International Wealth Management  

Increase (decrease):  

Total revenue  
PCL  
Non-interest expense  
Net income  

Percentage change in average U.S. dollar equivalent of C$1.00  
Percentage change in average British pound equivalent of C$1.00  
Percentage change in average Euro equivalent of C$1.00  

Pre-tax margin is defined as Income before income taxes divided by Total revenue. 

(1) 
(2)  Represents year-end spot balances. 
(3) 

(4)  Represents client-facing advisors across all our Wealth Management businesses. 

Client assets – AUA  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

AUA, beginning balance  

Asset inflows  
Asset outflows  

Total net flows  

Market impact  
Acquisitions/dispositions  
Foreign exchange  

Total market, acquisition/dispositions and foreign exchange impact  

AUA, balance at end of year  

AUA (2), (3)  
AUM (2)  
Average AUA  
Average AUM  
PCL on impaired loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances  
Number of employees (FTE)  
Number of advisors (4)  

Estimated impact of U.S. dollar, British pound and Euro translation on key income statement items  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts)  

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$

2022  
3,634   $

11,215  
14,849  
21  
13  
34  
10,701  
4,114  
3,144   $

  

4,308   $
7,448  
5,757  
2,667  
426  

  
16.5%  
2.57%  
27.7%  

Table 21   

2021  

2,689  
10,607  
13,296  
(33)  
(14)  
(47)  
9,929  
3,414  
2,626  

  
3,908  
6,320  
5,035  
2,726  
342  

  
15.9%  
2.25%  
25.7%  

158,100   $
141,200  
99,800  
158,800  

  

  

1,387,900   $
991,500  
1,318,100  
966,300  
0.01%  
22,782  
6,158  

  
136,000  
119,500  
84,000  
143,000  

  
1,322,300  
1,000,600  
1,242,400  
937,200  
(0.02)%  
19,486  
5,548  

$

2022 vs. 2021  
  
158  
5  
129  
17  

(3)%  
7%  
9%  

  
  

  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  

Table 22   

2022  

2021  

$

1,322,300   $
380,600  
(325,100)  

1,100,000  
352,800  
(299,200)  

55,500  
(153,000)  
79,800  
83,300  

10,100  

53,600  
235,900  
(12,100)  
(55,100)  

168,700  

$

1,387,900   $

1,322,300  

In addition to Canadian Wealth Management, U.S. Wealth Management (including City National), and International Wealth Management, AUA includes $6,400 million 
(2021 – $7,100 million) related to GAM. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

39 

2022  

Money  
market  
43,400   $ 233,300   $ 137,200   $ 586,700   $ 1,000,600   $

Multi-asset  
and other  

Fixed  
income  

Equity  

Total  

$

100,000  
(107,300)  
(700)  

(8,000)  
200  
–  
2,200  

42,900  
(48,900)  
(2,900)  

(8,900)  
(27,200)  
–  
(1,600)  

16,100  
(10,600)  
1,900  

7,400  
(18,100)  
–  
2,900  

16,600  
(13,200)  
22,700  

26,100  
(71,600)  
58,500  
29,000  

175,600  
(180,000)  
21,000  

16,600  
(116,700)  
58,500  
32,500  

Total market, acquisition/dispositions  

and foreign exchange impact  

2,400  

(28,800)  

(15,200)  

15,900  

(25,700)  

88,900  

AUM, balance at end of year  

$

37,800   $ 195,600   $ 129,400   $ 628,700   $

991,500   $ 1,000,600  

AUA by geographic mix and asset class  

Table 23   

2021  

Total  

836,400  
97,900  
(73,600)  
51,000  

75,300  
123,200  
(4,500)  
(29,800)  

Table 24   

2021  

  
24,700  
29,200  
91,300  
377,400  

522,600  

  
49,500  
90,300  
256,000  
308,400  

704,200  

  
15,300  
8,100  
37,700  
34,400  

95,500  

$

2022  

  

26,200   $
30,500  
81,800  
369,500  

508,000  

  
40,700  
116,000  
246,300  
297,100  

700,100  

  
16,600  
8,900  
47,000  
107,300  

179,800  

Client assets – AUM   

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

AUM, beginning balance  
Institutional inflows  
Institutional outflows  
Personal flows, net  

Total net flows  

Market impact  
Acquisition/dispositions  
Foreign exchange  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Canada (1)  

Money market  
Fixed income  
Equity  
Multi-asset and other  

Total Canada  

U.S. (1)  

Money market  
Fixed income  
Equity  
Multi-asset and other  

Total U.S.  

Other International (1)  

Money market  
Fixed income  
Equity  
Multi-asset and other  

Total International  

Total AUA  

$ 1,387,900   $ 1,322,300  

(1)  Geographic information is based on the location from where our clients are served. 

Financial performance 
2022 vs. 2021 
Net income increased $518 million or 20% from last year, mainly due to higher net interest income reflecting higher average 
volume growth and interest rates as well as higher average fee-based client assets. The impact of a legal provision taken in U.S. 
Wealth Management (including City National) in the prior year that was partially released in the first quarter of 2022 also 
contributed to the increase. These factors were partially offset by higher staff-related costs and variable compensation. 

Total revenue increased $1,553 million or 12%, largely due to higher net interest income driven by average volume growth of 
19% in loans and 11% in deposits and higher interest rates. Higher average fee-based client assets, primarily reflecting net sales, 
and the impact of foreign exchange translation also contributed to the increase. 

PCL was $34 million compared to $(47) million last year, primarily in U.S. Wealth Management (including City National), 
mainly attributable to releases of provisions on performing loans in the prior year reflecting the recovery from the COVID-19 
pandemic, as compared to provisions taken in the current year, largely driven by unfavourable changes in our macroeconomic 
outlook. Provisions taken on impaired loans in the current year, as compared to recoveries in the prior year, also contributed to 
the increase, resulting in a 3 bps increase in the PCL on impaired loans ratio.  

Non-interest expense increased $772 million or 8%, mainly due to higher staff and technology related costs. Higher variable 

compensation commensurate with increased results, the impact of foreign exchange translation as well as the Brewin Dolphin 
acquisition and related costs also contributed to the increase. Partly offsetting these factors was the impact of a legal provision 
taken in U.S. Wealth Management (including City National) in the prior year that was partially released in the first quarter of 
2022. 

AUA increased $66 billion or 5%, mainly due to the impact of foreign exchange translation, the inclusion of our acquisition of 

Brewin Dolphin, and net sales. These factors were partially offset by unfavourable market conditions. 

AUM decreased $9 billion or 1%, primarily due to unfavourable market conditions, partially offset by the inclusion of our 

acquisition of Brewin Dolphin, the impact of foreign exchange translation and net sales. 

40

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Business line review  

Canadian Wealth Management  

Canadian Wealth Management includes our full-service Canadian wealth advisory business, which is the largest in Canada as 
measured by AUA, with over 1,950 investment advisors providing comprehensive financial solutions with a focus on HNW and 
UHNW clients. Additionally, we provide discretionary investment management and estate and trust services to our clients 
through over 100 investment counsellors and over 100 trust professionals across Canada. 

We compete with domestic banks and trust companies, investment counselling firms, bank-owned full-service brokerages 

and boutique brokerages, mutual fund companies, and global private banks. In Canada, bank-owned wealth managers continue 
to be the major players. 

Financial performance 
Revenue increased $400 million or 10% from last year, primarily due to higher average fee-based client assets, largely driven by 
net sales, as well as higher net interest income from higher interest rates. 

Table 25   

Average AUA and AUM (Millions of Canadian dollars)

Selected highlights  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Total revenue  
Other information  

Average loans and acceptances, net  
Average deposits  
AUA (1)  
AUM (1)  
Average AUA  
Average AUM  

(1) 

Represents year-end spot balances. 

2022  

2021  
$ 4,308   $ 3,908  
  
  
4,600  
5,600  
26,200  
28,600  
511,300   524,200  
171,700   168,900  
519,600   486,100  
171,800   151,900  

600,000

500,000

400,000

300,000

200,000

100,000

0

U.S. Wealth Management (including City National)  

2022

2021

AUA

AUM

U.S. Wealth Management (including City National) also encompasses PCG and our C&C businesses. PCG is the 7th largest 
full-service wealth advisory firm in the U.S., as measured by number of advisors, with over 2,100 financial advisors. Our 
C&C business delivers clearing and execution services for small to mid-sized independent broker-dealers and registered 
investment advisor firms. City National provides comprehensive financial solutions to affluent individuals, entrepreneurs, 
professionals, their businesses, and their families, and provides a premier banking and financial experience through a high-touch 
service model, proactive advice and financial solutions. City National offers a broad range of lending, deposit, cash management, 
equipment financing, wealth management, and other products and services. In the U.S., we operate in a fragmented and highly 
competitive industry. Our competitors include other broker-dealers, commercial banks and other financial institutions that 
service HNW and UHNW individuals, entrepreneurs and their businesses. 

Financial performance 
Revenue increased $1,128 million or 18% from last year. In U.S. dollars, revenue increased $722 million or 14%, primarily due to 
higher net interest income driven by average volume growth of 14% in loans and 9% in deposits as well as higher interest rates, 
which also drove higher revenue from sweep deposits. Higher average fee-based client assets, largely driven by net sales, also 
contributed to the increase. 

NIM was up 21 bps, reflecting the impact of the rising interest rate environment as well as changes in average earning assets 

mix. 

Selected highlights  

Table 26   

Average AUA and AUM (Millions of U.S. dollars)

(Millions of Canadian dollars,  
except as otherwise noted)  

Total revenue  
Other information  

(Millions of U.S. dollars)  
Total revenue  
NIM  
Average earning assets, net  
Average loans, guarantees and  

letters of credit, net  

Average deposits  
AUA (1)  
AUM (1)  
Average AUA  
Average AUM  

(1) 

Represents year-end spot balances. 

600,000

500,000

400,000

300,000

200,000

100,000

0

2022  

$  7,448   $

  
5,757  
2.38%  
98,100  

68,800  
90,600  
513,700  
159,200  
538,100  
168,100  

2021  
6,320  

  
5,035  
2.17%  
86,300  

60,200  
83,000  
568,800  
182,100  
525,300  
165,600  

2022

2021

AUA

AUM

 

 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

41 

Global Asset Management  

GAM provides global investment management services and solutions for individual and institutional investors in Canada, the 
U.K., the U.S., Europe, and Asia. We provide a broad range of investment management services through mutual, pooled and 
private funds, fee-based accounts, and separately managed portfolios. We distribute our investment solutions through a broad 
network of bank branches, our self-directed and full-service wealth advisory businesses, independent third-party advisors and 
private banks, and directly to individual clients. We also provide investment solutions directly to institutional clients, including 
pension plans, insurance companies, corporations, and endowments and foundations. 

We are the largest retail fund company in Canada measured by AUM, as well as a leading institutional asset manager. We 

face competition in Canada from banks, insurance companies and asset management organizations. The Canadian fund 
management industry is large and mature, but remains a relatively fragmented industry. 

In the U.S., our asset management business offers investment management solutions and services, primarily to institutional 
investors, and competes with independent asset management firms, as well as those that are part of national and international 
banks and insurance companies. 

Internationally, through our global capabilities distributed under the brand RBC BlueBay Asset Management, we offer 
investment management solutions for institutions and, through private banks including RBC Wealth Management®, to HNW and 
UHNW investors. We face competition from asset managers that are owned by international banks, as well as national and 
regional asset managers in the geographies where we serve clients. 

Financial performance 
Revenue decreased $59 million or 2% from last year, largely due to changes in the fair value of seed capital investments, the 
impact of foreign exchange translation as well as lower performance fees. These factors were partially offset by higher fee-based 
revenue driven by the impact of net sales. 

Table 27   

Average AUM (Millions of Canadian dollars)

Selected highlights  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Total revenue  
Other information  

Canadian net long-term mutual  
fund sales (redemptions) (1)  

Canadian net money market mutual  

fund sales (redemptions) (1)  

AUM (2)  
Average AUM  

$

2022  
2,667   $

  

2021  
2,726  
  

(5,246)  

21,830  

(127)  
522,700  
562,200  

(2,757)  
597,300  
568,200  

600,000

500,000

400,000

300,000

200,000

100,000

0

(1) 

As reported to the Investment Funds Institute of Canada. Includes all 
prospectus-based mutual funds across our Canadian GAM businesses. 

(2)  Represents year-end spot balances. 

International Wealth Management  

2022

2021

International Wealth Management includes operations in the U.K., Ireland, the Channel Islands and Asia. We provide customized 
and integrated wealth management solutions to HNW, UHNW and corporate clients in key financial centres. Competitors to our 
International Wealth Management business include global wealth managers, traditional private banks and domestic wealth 
managers. 

Financial performance 
Revenue increased $84 million or 25% from last year, primarily due to higher net interest income reflecting higher interest rates. 

Table 28   

Average AUA and AUM (Millions of Canadian dollars)

Selected highlights  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Total revenue  
Other information  

Average loans, guarantees and  

letters of credit, net  

Average deposits  
AUA (1), (2)  
AUM (1), (2)  
Average AUA  
Average AUM  

$

2022  
 426   $
  

2021  

342  
  

5,000  
12,300  
170,100  
80,100  
97,200  
15,400  

4,600  
12,500  
86,800  
8,900  
90,500  
9,300  

150,000

100,000

50,000

0

(1) 
(2) 

Represents year-end spot balances. 
AUA and AUM reflect the inclusion of $79,800 million and $72,400 million, 
respectively, related to our acquisition of Brewin Dolphin, which closed on 
September 27, 2022. 

2022

2021

AUA

AUM

 

 

42

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Insurance  

RBC Insurance® offers a wide range of advice and solutions for individual and business clients, including life, health, wealth, 
home, auto, travel, annuities, and reinsurance.  

$3.5 billion  

Total revenue  

   > 4.9 million  

Number of clients  

Premiums and Deposits  

  
  
  

  

   2,731  

Employees  

  
  

  

RBC Insurance® is the largest Canadian bank-owned insurance organization on  
a total revenue basis and operates under two business lines: Canadian  
Insurance and International Insurance.  

In Canada, we offer life, health, travel, wealth accumulation solutions, and  
annuities to individuals and businesses. We also offer home and auto insurance  
for individuals through a distribution agreement with Aviva Canada. Our  
products and services are distributed through a wide variety of channels,  
including advice centres, RBC Insurance® stores, mobile advisors, digital  
platforms, independent brokers and partners.  

Outside Canada, we operate globally in the reinsurance and retrocession  
markets offering life, disability and longevity reinsurance.  

$5.5 billion
Total premiums
and deposits

45%  Life and Health

 42%  Annuity

12%  Segregated Fund Deposits
  

1%   Property and Casualty

  

  

  

  

2022 Operating environment 
› In Canada, the COVID-19 pandemic continued to stimulate an increased interest in protection, positioning us well to deliver our 
market-leading products through our best-in-class network of advisors and partners. The industry continued to face a number 
of challenges and opportunities, including a rising interest rate environment, evolving regulatory requirements, a competitive 
landscape underscored by consolidation, continued digital disruption and changing client expectations. As a result, we evolved 
our robust risk frameworks, controls and risk culture to protect clients and meet the expectations of both federal and 
provincial regulators. We also accelerated investment in product innovation, digitization, and data to better meet client 
protection needs, enhance access and convenience, and deliver improved experiences. We prioritized investment in our 
people, positioning ourselves as an employer of choice. 

› In the U.K., there was a sustained appetite for longevity risk transfer as companies continued to actively manage longevity risk. 

As a result, the longevity reinsurance market remained competitive in fiscal 2022. 

  

  

 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

43 

Strategic priorities 

OUR STRATEGY  

PROGRESS IN 2022  

PRIORITIES IN 2023  

Grow our Insurance business in Canada, and  
internationally  

Be an innovative, client-focused provider of a full  
suite of insurance solutions  

Launched RBC Growth Insurance Plus™ product  
for affluent Canadians looking to supplement life  
insurance needs, or for corporations, to help meet  
their corporate life insurance needs  

Introduced a new critical illness insurance  
product as an option for Group Benefits Solutions  
clients, strengthening our offering in the  
marketplace  

Launched a Workplace Wellness Toolkit designed  
to support businesses in assessing the wellbeing  
needs of their employees and creating wellness  
strategies tailored to the unique goals of their  
organization  

Continued to grow our longevity reinsurance and  
group annuity businesses, driven by our  
relationships within the U.K. and Canadian  
markets, and our strong underwriting expertise  

Launched Aviva Underwriting Chat, giving our  
home and auto advisors the ability to chat directly  
with Aviva’s Underwriters, improving the client  
experience by bringing efficiency, and reducing  
the time spent on hold while applications are  
considered  
Built the first interface between RBC Insurance®  
and our external distribution partners, allowing  
for more efficient new distribution channels and  
partnerships for term life products  

Launched electronic delivery of select life and  
health contracts, improving cycle times, and  
increasing contract delivery for clients  

Introduced a new disability electronic application  
enabling online submissions of certain disability  
products, simplifying the process, facilitating  
quicker decisions on applications, and reducing  
time to purchase  

Added digital signature capabilities to electronic  
applications for our simplified term life insurance  
product, improving the advisor and client  
experience  

Added two socially responsible investing options  
to our segregated fund offerings. The fund  
investments exclude companies whose primary  
business is alcohol, tobacco products, firearms,  
cannabis, adult entertainment or gambling  

As part of our continuous commitment to diversity  
& inclusion, we enhanced the language of our  
Group Life and Health booklets and contracts,  
recognizing all gender identities  

Develop and sustain excellence in distribution   

Launched RBC Insurance® Sales Technology  
Support Centre (STSC) to support advisors and  
their clients, resulting in faster and more efficient  
support for key tools and technologies  

Sustain distribution excellence through channel  
growth and by supporting our agents and partners  
with best-in-class tools, and unique value  
propositions  

Accelerate investments in product innovation,  
digitization, and data  

Invest in product innovation, risk selection,  
underwriting, digital capabilities and other  
solutions which streamline our processes in order  
to attract and retain clients  

Evolve our risk culture  

Evolve our robust risk frameworks, controls and  
risk culture to protect clients and meet the  
expectations of both federal and provincial  
regulators  

Attract and retain top talent  

Remained an employer of choice enabling us to  
attract, retain and engage employees to serve our  
clients and deliver value to our shareholders  

Foster diversity, equity and inclusion, and focus  
on inspiring future readiness to attract, retain and  
engage top talent  

Outlook 

The insurance industry is expected to continue experiencing change in fiscal 2023 driven by evolving client expectations, 
accelerated digital disruption, and distribution innovation. Government and regulatory pressures are expected to continue into 
the coming fiscal year. As consumers focus more attention on overall protection, we will continue to provide advice and 
education, deliver our products and services, and create industry partnerships to assist our clients. We will maintain our strength 
by investing in technology, product and service innovation, efficient distribution channels, and a strong risk culture. This will 
enable our goal of being an innovative, client-focused provider of a full suite of insurance solutions, and will allow us to thrive in 
a rapidly changing environment. 

For further details on our general economic review and outlook, refer to the Economic, market and regulatory review and outlook 
section. 

44

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Insurance  

Non-interest income  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts and as otherwise noted)  

Net earned premiums  
Investment Income, gains/(losses) on assets supporting insurance policyholder liabilities (1)  
Fee income  
Total revenue  

PCL  
Insurance policyholder benefits and claims (1)  
Insurance policyholder acquisition expense  
Non-interest expense  

Income before income taxes  
Net income  

Revenue by business  
Canadian Insurance  
International Insurance  

Key ratios  

ROE  

Selected balance sheet information  

Average total assets  

Other information  

Premiums and deposits (2)  
Canadian Insurance  
International Insurance  

$

$ 

$

$

$ 

2022  

  

4,653   $
(1,363)  
220  
3,510  
–  
1,468  
315  
588  
1,139  

857   $

  
653   $

2,857  

  
36.4%  

  

  

22,500   $

5,498   $
2,999  
2,499  
11,511  
(1,888)  
2,731  

Table 29   

2021  

  
4,840  
577  
183  
5,600  
(1)  
3,547  
344  
596  
1,114  
889  

  
2,917  
2,683  

  
37.4%  

  
21,600  

  
5,721  
3,162  
2,559  
12,816  
(13)  
2,573  

Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities  
Fair value changes on investments backing policyholder liabilities (1)  
Number of employees (FTE)  

(1) 

(2) 

Includes unrealized gains and losses on investments backing policyholder liabilities attributable to fluctuation of assets designated as FVTPL. The investments which 
support actuarial liabilities are predominantly fixed income assets designated as FVTPL. Consequently, changes in the fair values of these assets are recorded in 
Insurance premiums, investment and fee income in the Consolidated Statements of Income and are largely offset by changes in the fair value of the actuarial liabilities, 
the impact of which is reflected in PBCAE. 
Premiums and deposits include premiums on risk-based individual and group insurance and annuity products as well as segregated fund deposits, consistent with 
insurance industry practices. 

Financial performance 
2022 vs. 2021 
Net income decreased $32 million or 4% from last year, largely due to the impact of lower new longevity reinsurance contracts, 
partially offset by higher favourable investment-related experience. 

Total revenue decreased $2,090 million or 37%, mainly due to the change in fair value of investments backing policyholder 

liabilities and lower group annuity sales, both of which are largely offset in PBCAE as indicated below. These factors were 
partially offset by business growth in Canadian Insurance across the majority of our products. 

PBCAE decreased $2,108 million or 54%, mainly reflecting the change in fair value of investments backing policyholder 
liabilities and lower group annuity sales, both of which are largely offset in revenue. Higher favourable investment-related 
experience and favourable annual actuarial assumption updates in the current year largely related to economic assumptions 
also contributed to the decrease. These factors were partially offset by the impact of lower new longevity reinsurance contracts, 
as well as business growth in Canadian Insurance. 

Non-interest expense decreased $8 million or 1% mainly due to lower costs associated with ongoing efficiency initiatives and 

lower legal costs. These factors were partially offset by increased costs in support of sales and client service activities. 

Business line review  

Canadian Insurance  

We offer life, health, travel, wealth accumulation solutions, and annuities to individuals and businesses across Canada. We also 
offer home and auto insurance for individuals, through a distribution agreement with Aviva Canada. Our life and health portfolio 
includes participating whole life, universal life, term life, critical illness, disability, and group benefits, including long-term 
disability, and health and dental insurance. Wealth solutions include a family of segregated funds as well as individual annuities. 
Our travel products include out-of-province/country medical coverage, and trip cancellation and interruption insurance. 

Our group annuities business helps defined benefit pension plan sponsors better manage and control risk. RBC Insurance® 
has a set of strategies and initiatives aimed at building our momentum and positioning us for growth in this product line, where 
companies are increasingly looking to transfer the risks associated with their pension obligations to insurance companies – 
either through group annuity contracts or longevity swap products. 

In Canada, many of our competitors specialize in either life or health or in property and casualty products. As a multi-line 
carrier, we offer a broad suite of solutions, increasing convenience for our clients. Many of our solutions hold market leadership 
positions, including our disability insurance and wealth products. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

45 

Financial performance 
Total revenue decreased $2,264 million or 78% from last year, primarily due to the change in fair value of investments backing 
policyholder liabilities and lower group annuity sales. These factors were partially offset by business growth across the majority 
of our products. 

Premiums and deposits decreased $163 million or 5%, mainly due to group annuity and individual life products. 

Table 30   

Premiums and deposits (Millions of Canadian dollars) 

Selected highlights  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Total revenue  
Other information  

Premiums and deposits  

Life and health  
Property and casualty  
Annuity  
Segregated fund deposits  

International Insurance  

$

2021  

2022  
653   $ 2,917  
  
  
1,434  
77  
989  
662  

  
  
1,416  
81  
834  
668  

4,000

3,000

2,000

1,000

0

Fair value changes on investments  
backing policyholder liabilities  

(2,259)  

(119)  

2022

2021

Life and health

Annuity

Property and casualty

Segregated fund

International Insurance is primarily comprised of our reinsurance businesses which insure risks of other insurance and 
reinsurance companies. We offer life, disability and longevity reinsurance solutions. 

The global reinsurance market is competitive with significant market opportunities in the U.S., U.K, and Europe. Market share 

is largely held by a small number of reinsurers, with RBC Insurance® continuing to have steady growth. 

Financial performance 
Total revenue increased $174 million or 6% from last year, mainly due to the change in fair value of investments backing 
policyholder liabilities. 

Premiums and deposits decreased $60 million or 2%. 

Table 31   

Premiums and deposits (Millions of Canadian dollars) 

Selected highlights  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Total revenue  
Other information  

Premiums and deposits  

Life and health  
Annuity  

Fair value changes on investments  
backing policyholder liabilities  

2022   

2021  

$ 2,857   $ 2,683  
  
  
1,050  
1,509  

  
  
1,044  
1,455  

371  

106  

4,000

3,000

2,000

1,000

0

2022

2021

Life and health

Annuity

 

 

46

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Investor & Treasury Services  

Investor & Treasury Services provides asset, payment and treasury services to financial institutions and asset owners worldwide. 
We are a leader in Canadian cash management and transaction banking services. Trusted with nearly 4 trillion in AUA, our focus 
is on safeguarding client assets and supporting our clients’ growth. 

$3.9 trillion  

AUA  

  

Revenue by Geography  

   16.4%  

Return on equity  

  
  
  

  

   $61.8 billion  

Average client deposits  

  
  

  

Our product and service offering includes custody, fund administration,  
shareholder services, private capital services, middle office, transaction banking  
(including trade finance, insourced solutions and services to broker dealers), and  
treasury and market services (including cash/liquidity management, foreign  
exchange and securities finance).  

Our asset services business competes against the world’s largest custodians in  
selected countries in North America, Europe, and the U.K.  

Our transaction banking business competes against the largest banks in Canada.  

$2.2 billion
Total revenue

 39%  North America

33%  Europe (Ex. U.K.)

 17%  U.K.

 11%  Asia-Paciﬁc

  

  

  

  

  

  

2022 Operating environment 
› Results for our asset services business were impacted by industry headwinds such as continued pricing pressure, partially 

› Our funding and liquidity business managed through a rising rate environment and results were driven by increased market 

› We continued to execute on initiatives to improve our cost structure, focus on markets and segments where we have 

competitive advantages and upgrade our technology capabilities. 

offset by rising interest rates. 

opportunities. 

Strategic priorities 

OUR STRATEGY  

Grow the Canadian franchise  

PROGRESS IN 2022  

PRIORITIES IN 2023  

Delivered significant revenue growth in our  
transaction banking business through acquisition  
of new clients, expansion of existing relationships,  
and delivery of new product offerings  

Grow relationships with Canadian asset  
managers, investment counsellors, pension  
funds, insurance companies, and transaction  
banking clients  

Deliver new products to meet growing client  
demand and enhance our core capabilities in  
Canada to improve the client experience  

Compete in select asset servicing  
segments and markets  

Signed a Memorandum of Understanding to divest  
our European asset servicing activities and  
associated Malaysian centre of excellence  

Complete the intended divestiture (subject to  
customary closing conditions, including  
regulatory and antitrust approvals)  

Continued cross-segment collaboration to grow  
fund finance sales  

Deliver seamless client experiences and  
employ technology to enable our clients’  
success  

Continued to evolve our digital offering, improve  
interactive applications to increase clients’ digital  
self-service capacity and reduce operational risk  

Continue to invest to seamlessly onboard,  
integrate and support our clients through  
digital channels  

Outlook 

In fiscal 2023, we expect the global asset services industry will remain challenging. While we expect some benefit from rising 
interest rates in fiscal 2023, ongoing fee reductions, competition from global custody providers in key markets and the impact of 
reduced client activity as a result of lower asset values and net client movements, are expected to constrain revenue growth. 
Ongoing inflationary pressures coupled with recession concerns also have the potential to impact our results in fiscal 2023. 
Completing the divestiture of our European asset servicing activities and associated Malaysian centre of excellence will be a 
priority. We will focus on growing in markets and segments where we have competitive advantages, improving operational 
efficiency and leveraging our investment in technology to enable our clients’ success. 

We will continue to prioritize prudent risk and funding management amidst an evolving liquidity environment and uncertain 

market backdrop. 

For further details on our general economic review and outlook, refer to the Economic, market and regulatory review and outlook 
section. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

47 

Investor & Treasury Services  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts and as otherwise noted)  

Net interest income  
Non-interest income  

Total revenue  

PCL on performing assets  
PCL on impaired assets  

PCL  

Non-interest expense  

Income before income taxes  
Net income  

Key ratios  

ROE  

Selected balance sheet information  

Average total assets  
Average deposits  

Average client deposits  
Average wholesale funding deposits  

Other information  

AUA (1)  
Average AUA  
Number of employees (FTE)  

Increase (decrease):  

Total revenue  
PCL  
Non-interest expense  
Net income  

Percentage change in average U.S. dollar equivalent of C$1.00  
Percentage change in average British pound equivalent of C$1.00  
Percentage change in average Euro equivalent of C$1.00  

(1) 

Represents year-end spot balances. 

Table 32   

2021  

460  
1,704  
2,164  
(8)  
–  
(8)  
1,589  
583  
440  

2022  
498   $

1,725  
2,223  
1  
(4)  
(3)  
1,569  
657  
513   $

  
16.4%  

  

250,600   $
245,000  
61,800  
183,200  

  
14.0%  

  
235,400  
219,800  
64,400  
155,400  

  
  
$ 3,906,900   $ 4,640,900  
4,634,900  
3,718  

4,392,600  
3,497  

$

$

$

$

  
(70)  
–  
(68)  
(3)  

(3)%  
7%  
9%  

  

  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  

Estimated impact of U.S. dollar, British pound and Euro translation on key income statement items  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts)  

2022 vs. 2021  

Financial performance 
2022 vs. 2021 
Net income increased $73 million or 17% from last year, mainly driven by higher revenue from client deposits, partially offset by 
higher technology-related costs. 

Total revenue increased $59 million or 3%, mainly due to higher revenue from client deposits reflecting improved margins, 

partially offset by the impact of foreign exchange translation. 

Non-interest expense decreased $20 million or 1%, mainly due to the impact of foreign exchange translation and lower 
staff-related costs. These factors were partially offset by higher technology-related costs, a favourable sales tax adjustment in 
the prior year and higher legal costs. 

48

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Capital Markets  

>19,500  

Number of clients  

RBC Capital Markets® is a premier global investment bank providing expertise in advisory & origination, sales & trading, and 
lending & financing to corporations, institutional clients, asset managers, private equity firms and governments globally. Our 
professionals ensure that clients receive the advice, products, and services their businesses need from 63 offices in 18 countries. 
Our presence extends across North America, the U.K. & Europe, and Australia, Asia & other regions. 

   #9  

   6,887  

Global league table rankings1  

  
  
   We operate two main business lines, Corporate & Investment Banking and  

Employees  

  

Revenue by Geography  

Global Markets.  

In North America, we offer a full suite of products and services which include  
equity and debt origination and distribution, advisory services, and sales &  
trading. In Canada, we are a market leader with a strategic presence in all lines  
of capital markets businesses. In the U.S., where our competitors include large  
global investment banks, we have a full industry sector coverage and investment  
banking product range, as well as capabilities in credit, secured lending,  
municipal finance, fixed income, currencies & commodities, and equities.  

Outside North America, we have a targeted strategic presence in the U.K. &  
Europe, Australia, Asia & other markets aligned to our global expertise. In the  
U.K. & Europe, we offer a diversified set of capabilities in key industry sectors of  
focus. In Australia and Asia, we compete with global and regional investment  
banks in targeted areas aligned to our global expertise, including fixed income  
distribution and currencies trading, secured financing, as well as corporate and  
investment banking.  

$9.1 billion
Total revenue

49%  U.S.

29%  Canada

16%  U.K. & Europe

6%  Australia, Asia &
        other regions

  

    

  

  

2022 Operating environment 
› The fiscal 2022 operating environment was characterized by significant geopolitical and economic uncertainty alongside 

elevated inflation and rising interest rates, resulting in increased financial market volatility and asset revaluation. This created 
a challenging operating environment that led to a decline in activity across some of our global capital markets businesses, 
particularly in the second half of the fiscal year. Global investment banking fee pools were impacted by weakness in credit and 
equity markets beginning in the second fiscal quarter of 2022, resulting in an approximately 30% decline in global investment 
banking fee pools1 this fiscal year compared to record levels in fiscal 2021. 

› Trading activity remained elevated in some businesses, particularly in macro-focused businesses such as rates and foreign 

exchange. However, this was offset by a more challenging environment for credit trading as a result of widening spreads and 
slower new issuance activities. Despite the market disruption, our balance sheet strength enabled us to continue supporting 
our clients during the 2022 fiscal year. 

› While the credit environment in fiscal 2022 reflected the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, it also reflected unfavourable 
changes in our economic outlook towards the latter half of the year, including the impact of slowing economic growth as well 
as rising inflation and interest rates. PCL on impaired loans remained below pre-pandemic levels. 

1 

Source: Dealogic, based on global investment bank fees, Fiscal 2022 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

49 

Strategic priorities 

Grow and deepen client relationships  

OUR STRATEGY  

PROGRESS IN 2022  

PRIORITIES IN 2023  

Lead with advice and extend capabilities  

Deliver holistic coverage to clients and drive  
multi-product client relationships to gain market  
share  

Expand client coverage in underpenetrated  
sectors and products  

Grow all areas of origination, inclusive of  
structured solutions, through partnership across  
Corporate & Investment Banking and Global  
Markets  

Continue to drive cross-platform and geographic  
collaboration across businesses and asset classes  

Lead on Sustainable Finance1, Energy Transition,  
and Private Capital solutions  

Strengthened relationships with key clients,  
resulting in high quality mandates and notable  
wins in Corporate & Investment Banking and  
Global Markets, for example:  
•

Financial Advisor to DigitalBridge and IFM  
Investors on US$11 billion landmark  
communications infrastructure take-private  
transaction  
Financial Advisor and Lead Arranger to The  
Vertex Company and American Industrial  
Partners on its merger with Vectrus, creating a  
US$2.1 billion entity  

(cid:129)

Expanded advisory and thought leadership  
capabilities inclusive of Sustainable Finance1 and  
Private Capital  
Refreshed our Global Markets strategy to deliver  
holistic client service providing trusted solutions  
and execution, leveraging origination and  
financing, enabled by digital offerings  
Examples include:  
(cid:129)

Joint Bookrunner and Global Coordinator on  
Definity Financial’s Initial Public Offering  
(IPO) and Private Placement Agent on its  
Cornerstone Private Placement raising  
proceeds of C$2.1 billion, making it the largest  
IPO in Canadian financial services since 1999   
Advised SS&C Technologies on the £1.2 billion  
acquisition of BluePrism, demonstrating our  
strength in delivering support in complex  
cross-border, sector and product transactions  
involving publicly traded targets  

(cid:129)

Launched Aiden® Arrival, the second algorithm on  
the AI-based electronic trading platform, aimed at  
enhancing flexibility and control over trade  
execution  
Scaled our digital research platform, Elements,  
into next generation applications utilizing  
alternative data  

Leverage digital and data to deliver  
innovative solutions  

Prioritize and align for impact  

Drive agility and ease of doing business  

Engage, enable and empower our talent  

Scale digital capabilities including electronic  
execution, analytics and platform capabilities  
across Capital Markets  

Generate differentiated insights and thought  
leadership leveraging data and analytics  

Embedded productivity and efficiency measures  
within the businesses, and formalized a benefits  
tracking process  
Enhanced collaboration with Treasury & Market  
Services to increase funding capacity  

Strategically deploy talent, technology and  
financial resources to areas of greatest  
opportunity  

Align business and functional strategies to build  
scale and maximize impact  

Leveraged the newly created cross-business and  
functional Investment Review Board to address  
the technology capital allocation process  

Improve processes, leveraging an end-to-end  
approach to enhance client outcomes  

Accelerate execution and simplify procedures to  
improve employee experience  

Invested in senior talent through external hiring  
and promotions and repositioned our talent  
strategy to be better aligned with business  
outcomes  
Advanced our Diversity & Inclusion (D&I) strategy  
and improved representation of diverse talent  

Invest in talent through scaled development  
programs, increased mobility, senior hiring and  
promotions  

Deliver on D&I strategy and build on our inclusive  
culture  

Outlook 

In fiscal 2023, the outlook remains uncertain and financial market volatility is expected to persist. Despite these market 
dynamics, a modest recovery of capital markets industry revenues is expected. We will continue to pursue market share growth 
in both our Corporate & Investment Banking and Global Markets businesses. In Investment Banking, we continue to focus on 
targeted sectors and investment in talent, with an emphasis on advisory products. In Global Markets, our focus remains on 
delivering robust results through continued resource optimization, acceleration of cross-selling activities, further deployment of 
electronic and digital capabilities, and building on our strong risk management practices. In Corporate Banking, following higher 
levels of balance sheet deployment in support of increased client financing demands in fiscal 2022, we will continue to pursue a 
moderate growth approach consistent with our focus on our balance sheet-enabled strategy to deepen relationships with lending 
clients in order to drive growth in our non-lending businesses. This strategy will continue to be underpinned by strong credit risk 
management practices, optimization of our financial resources and supporting our clients in the execution of their strategies. 

For further details on our general economic review and outlook, refer to the Economic, market and regulatory review and outlook 
section. 

1 

50

Sustainable finance refers to financial activities that take into account environmental, social and governance factors 

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

$

$

$

$

$

2022  
4,698   $
4,422  
9,120  
(34)  
23  
(11)  
5,561  
3,570  
2,921   $

4,309   $
5,245  
(434)  

  
11.3%  

  

  

824,800   $
133,000  
121,700  
79,000  

  
6,887  

  
0.01%  

  
42  
–  
8  
34  

(3)%  
7%  
9%  

Table 33   

2021  

4,553  
5,634  
10,187  
(476)  
(33)  
(509)  
5,427  
5,269  
4,187  

  
4,823  
5,542  
(178)  

  
18.3%  

  
710,200  
122,900  
100,000  
73,500  

  
6,414  

  
(0.04)%  

  

  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts and as otherwise noted)  

Capital Markets  

Net interest income (1)  
Non-interest income (1)  

Total revenue (1)  

PCL on performing assets  
PCL on impaired assets  

PCL  

Non-interest expense  

Income before income taxes  
Net income  

Revenue by business  

Corporate & Investment Banking  
Global Markets  
Other  

Key ratios  

ROE  

Selected balance sheet information  

Average total assets  
Average trading securities  
Average loans and acceptances, net  
Average deposits  

Other information  

Number of employees (FTE)   

Credit information  

PCL on impaired loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances  

Estimated impact of U.S. dollar, British pound and Euro translation on key income statement items  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts)  

2022 vs. 2021  

Increase (decrease):  

Total revenue  
PCL  
Non-interest expense  
Net income  

Percentage change in average U.S. dollar equivalent of C$1.00  
Percentage change in average British pound equivalent of C$1.00  
Percentage change in average Euro equivalent of C$1.00  

(1) 

The teb adjustment for 2022 was $572 million (2021 – $518 million). For further discussion, refer to the How we measure and report our business segments section. 

Revenue by region (Millions of Canadian dollars) 

10,500

9,000

7,500

6,000

4,500

3,000

1,500

0

2022

2021

Australia, Asia & other regions

U.K. & Europe

U.S.

Canada  

Financial performance 
2022 vs. 2021 
Net income decreased $1,266 million or 30% from last year, primarily driven by lower revenue in Corporate & Investment Banking, 
larger releases of provisions on performing assets in the prior year, and lower revenue in Global Markets. 

Total revenue decreased $1,067 million or 10%, mainly due to the impact from loan underwriting markdowns, primarily in the 
U.S., largely driven by challenging market conditions. Lower debt and equity origination across most regions also contributed to 
the decrease. This was partially offset by higher lending revenue across most regions. 

PCL was $(11) million compared to $(509) million last year, primarily attributable to releases of provisions on performing 
assets reflecting the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic in both 2022 and 2021. The releases in the current year were partially 
offset by unfavourable changes in our macroeconomic outlook. Provisions taken on impaired loans in the current year as 
compared to recoveries in the prior year also contributed to the increase, resulting in an increase of 5 bps in the PCL on impaired 
loans ratio. 

Non-interest expense increased $134 million or 2%, mainly due to higher technology-related costs, higher marketing and 
business development costs, and higher trade execution costs. These factors were partially offset by changes in the fair value of 
our share-based compensation plans, which was largely offset in other revenue. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

51 

Business line review  

Corporate & Investment Banking  

Corporate & Investment Banking comprises our corporate lending, municipal finance, loan syndication, debt and equity 
origination, and M&A advisory services. For debt and equity origination, revenue is allocated between Corporate & Investment 
Banking and Global Markets based on the contribution of each group in accordance with an established agreement. 

Financial performance 
Corporate & Investment Banking revenue of $4,309 million decreased $514 million or 11% from last year. 

Investment Banking revenue decreased $773 million or 30%, mainly due to the impact from loan underwriting markdowns, 
primarily in the U.S., largely driven by challenging market conditions. Lower debt origination primarily in the U.S. also contributed 
to the decrease. 

Lending and other revenue increased $259 million or 11%, primarily due to average volume growth in the U.S. and Europe. 

Selected highlights  

Table 34   

Breakdown of total revenue (Millions of Canadian dollars)  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Total revenue (1)  
Breakdown of revenue (1)  
Investment banking  
Lending and other (2)  

Other information  
Average assets  
Average loans and acceptances, net  

2022  

2021  

$  4,309   $ 4,823  
  
  
2,559  
1,786  
2,264  
2,523  
  
  
81,400  
100,100  
73,300  
92,400  

5,000

4,000

3,000

2,000

1,000

0

(1) 

The teb adjustment for the year ended October 31, 2022 was $39 million 
(October 31, 2021 – $37 million). For further discussion, refer to the How we 
measure and report our business segments section. 

(2)  Comprises our corporate lending, client securitization, and global credit 

businesses. 

Global Markets  

2022

2021

Investment banking

Lending and other

 

Global Markets comprises our sales and trading businesses including fixed income, foreign exchange, commodities, and equities, 
as well as our repo and secured financing products. 

Financial performance 
Global Markets revenue of $5,245 million decreased $297 million or 5% from last year. 

Revenue in our Fixed income, currencies and commodities business decreased $308 million or 11%, largely driven by lower 
fixed income trading revenue and lower debt origination both primarily in the U.S. These factors were partially offset by higher 
foreign exchange trading revenue across all regions. 

Revenue in our Equities business decreased $73 million or 5%, primarily due to lower equity origination across most regions. 
Revenue in our Repo and secured financing business increased $84 million or 7%, mainly due to increased client activity. 

Selected highlights  

Table 35   

Breakdown of total revenue (Millions of Canadian dollars)  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Total revenue (1)  
Breakdown of revenue (1)  

Fixed income, currencies  

and commodities  

Equities  
Repo and secured financing (2)  

Other information  
Average assets  

2022  

2021  

$  5,245   $ 5,542  
  
  

2,570  
1,458  
1,217  
  

2,878  
1,531  
1,133  
  
707,500   626,500  

6,000

5,000

4,000

3,000

2,000

1,000

0

(1) 

The teb adjustment for the year ended October 31, 2022 was $533 million 
(October 31, 2021 – $481 million). For further discussion, refer to the How we 
measure and report our business segments section. 

(2)  Comprises our secured funding businesses for internal businesses and 

external clients. 

Other  

2022

2021

Repo and secured
ﬁnancing

Global equities

Fixed income, currencies
and commodities

 

Other includes our legacy portfolio, which mainly consists of our U.S. commercial mortgage-backed securities (MBS), bank-
owned life insurance (BOLI) derivative contracts and structured rates in Asia. 

Financial performance 
Revenue decreased $256 million from last year, reflecting higher residual funding costs and changes in the fair value of hedges 
related to our share-based compensation plans, which was largely offset in non-interest expense. 

52

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Corporate Support  

Corporate Support consists of Technology & Operations, which provides the technological and operational foundation required 
to effectively deliver products and services to our clients, Functions, which includes our finance, human resources, risk 
management, internal audit and other functional groups, as well as our Corporate Treasury function. Reported results for 
Corporate Support mainly reflect certain activities related to monitoring and oversight of enterprise activities which are not 
allocated to business segments. For further details, refer to the How we measure and report our business segments section. 

Corporate Support  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Net interest income (loss) (1)  
Non-interest income (loss) (1), (2)  

Total revenue (1), (2)  

PCL  
Non-interest expense (2)  

Income (loss) before income taxes (1)  

Income taxes (recoveries) (1)  

Net income (loss)  

Table 36   

2022  
(132)   $
(728)  
(860)  
1  
(247)  
(614)  
(616)  

2   $

$

$

2021  

(321)  
421  
100  
(1)  
405  
(304)  
(365)  
61  

Teb adjusted. 

(1) 
(2)  Revenue for the year ended October 31, 2022, included losses of $363 million (October 31, 2021 – gains of $394 million) on economic hedges of our U.S. Wealth 

Management (including City National) share-based compensation plans, and non-interest expense included $(289) million (October 31, 2021 – $382 million) of share-based 
compensation expense driven by changes in the fair value of liabilities relating to our U.S. Wealth Management (including City National) share-based compensation 
plans. 

Due to the nature of activities and consolidation adjustments reported in this segment, we believe that a comparative period 
analysis is not relevant. 

Total revenue and Income taxes (recoveries) in each period in Corporate Support include the deduction of the teb adjustments 
related to the gross-up of income from Canadian taxable corporate dividends and the U.S. tax credit investment business 
recorded in Capital Markets. The amount deducted from revenue was offset by an equivalent increase in Income taxes 
(recoveries). 

The teb amount for the year ended October 31, 2022 was $572 million and was $518 million last year. 

The following identifies the material items, other than the teb impacts noted previously, affecting the reported results in each 
year. 

2022 
Net income was $2 million. Net favourable tax adjustments and asset/liability management activities were offset by residual 
unallocated items. 

2021 
Net income was $61 million, primarily due to asset/liability management activities and residual unallocated items, partially offset 
by net unfavourable tax adjustments. 

Quarterly financial information  

Fourth quarter performance  

Q4 2022 vs. Q4 2021 
Fourth quarter net income of $3,882 million was down $10 million. Diluted EPS of $2.74 was up $0.06 and ROE of 15.6% was down 
130 bps. Our CET1 ratio of 12.6% was down 110 bps from a year ago. Lower results in Capital Markets and Corporate Support were 
partially offset by strong earnings in Wealth Management and Personal & Commercial Banking. 

Total revenue increased $191 million or 2%, largely due to higher net interest income and trading revenue. These factors were 

partially offset by lower insurance revenue, other revenue, underwriting and other advisory fees and mutual fund revenue. 

Net interest income increased $1,221 million or 24%, mainly due to higher spreads and average volume growth in loans and 
deposits in Canadian Banking and Wealth Management. These factors were partially offset by lower net interest income in Investor 
& Treasury Services reflecting higher funding costs that were offset by related gains on non-trading derivatives in Other revenue. 
Insurance revenue decreased $857 million or 57%, primarily due to lower group annuity sales and the change in fair value of 

investments backing policyholder liabilities, both of which are largely offset in PBCAE. 

Trading revenue increased $348 million, largely due to higher fixed income trading revenue across most regions. 
Mutual fund revenue decreased $132 million or 12%, largely due to lower average mutual fund balances in Wealth 

Management and Canadian Banking. 

Underwriting and other advisory fees decreased $174 million or 27%, mainly due to lower debt origination across all regions. 
Other revenue decreased $219 million or 90%, largely due to the impact of economic hedges, including changes in the fair 

value of hedges related to our U.S. share-based compensation plans that were largely offset in Non-interest expense. These 
factors were partially offset by net gains on non-trading derivatives, which were offset within net interest income. 

Total PCL was $381 million compared to $(227) million last year, reflecting provisions taken on performing loans and higher 
provisions on impaired loans in the current quarter as compared to releases of provisions on performing loans in the prior year, 
primarily in Personal & Commercial Banking. The PCL on loans ratio of 18 bps compared to (12) bps last year increased 30 bps. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

53 

PBCAE decreased $916 million, primarily due to lower group annuity sales and the change in fair value of investments 

backing policyholder liabilities, both of which are largely offset in revenue. Higher favourable annual actuarial assumption 
updates largely related to economic assumption updates in the current year also contributed to the decrease. 

Non-interest expense increased $626 million or 10%, mainly attributable to higher variable compensation, primarily due to 
the timing of true-ups related to our variable compensation plans in Capital Markets and higher staff-related costs. The impact of 
foreign exchange translation as well as the Brewin Dolphin acquisition and related costs also contributed to the increase. These 
factors were partially offset by the change in the fair value of our U.S. share-based compensation plans as well as the impact of a 
legal provision taken in U.S Wealth Management (including City National) in the prior year that was partially released in the first 
quarter of 2022. 

Income tax expense decreased $117 million or 11%, primarily due to an increase in income from lower tax rate jurisdictions in 
the current year and lower income before income taxes. The effective income tax rate of 20.1% decreased 190 bps from last year, 
mainly due to an increase in income from lower tax rate jurisdictions in the current year. 

Q4 2022 vs. Q3 2022 
Net income of $3,882 million was up $305 million or 9% compared to last quarter, primarily due to higher fixed income trading 
revenue in Capital Markets as the prior quarter included the impact from loan underwriting markdowns, primarily in the U.S, and 
higher spreads in Canadian Banking and Wealth Management. These factors were partially offset by higher compensation, 
primarily due to the timing of true-ups related to our variable compensation plans. 

Quarterly results and trend analysis  

Our quarterly results are impacted by a number of trends and recurring factors, which include seasonality of certain businesses, 
general economic and market conditions, and fluctuations in the Canadian dollar relative to other currencies. The following table 
summarizes our results for the last eight quarters (the period): 

Quarterly results (1)  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except per  
share and percentage amounts)  

2022  

2021  

Table 37   

Q4  

Q3  

Q2  

Q1     

Q4  

Q3  

Q2  

Q1  

Personal & Commercial Banking   $ 5,419   $ 5,182   $ 4,739   $ 4,803      $ 4,605   $ 4,651   $ 4,527   $ 4,563  
3,219  
Wealth Management  
1,809  
Insurance  
565  
Investor & Treasury Services  
2,708  
Capital Markets (2)  
79  
Corporate Support (2)  

3,613     
1,399     
587     
2,810     
(146)    

3,444  
1,501  
548  
2,298  
(20)  

3,373  
1,754  
517  
2,463  
(2)  

3,605  
234  
551  
2,348  
(257)  

3,655  
1,233  
582  
1,649  
(169)  

3,976  
644  
503  
2,313  
(288)  

3,260  
536  
534  
2,718  
43  

Total revenue  

PCL  
PBCAE  
Non-interest expense  

Income before income taxes  

Income taxes  

Net income  

EPS – basic  

 – diluted  

Effective income tax rate  
Period average US$ equivalent  

12,567  
381  
116  
7,209  

4,861  
979  

12,132  
340  
850  
6,386  

4,556  
979  

11,220  
(342)  
(180)  
6,434  

5,308  
1,055  

13,066     
105     
997     
6,580     

5,384     
1,289     

12,376  
(227)  
1,032  
6,583  

4,988  
1,096  

12,756  
(540)  
1,304  
6,420  

5,572  
1,276  

11,618  
(96)  
149  
6,379  

5,186  
1,171  

12,943  
110  
1,406  
6,542  

4,885  
1,038  

$ 3,882   $ 3,577   $ 4,253   $ 4,095      $ 3,892   $ 4,296   $ 4,015   $ 3,847  

$

2.75   $
2.74  

2.52   $
2.51  

2.97   $
2.96  

2.84      $
2.84     

2.68   $
2.68  

2.97   $
2.97  

2.76   $
2.76  

2.66  
2.66  

20.1%  

21.5%  

19.9%  

23.9%     

22.0%  

22.9%  

22.6%  

21.2%  

of C$1.00  

$ 0.739   $ 0.783   $ 0.789   $ 0.787      $ 0.796   $ 0.812   $ 0.798   $ 0.779  

(1) 
(2) 

Fluctuations in the Canadian dollar relative to other foreign currencies have affected our consolidated results over the period. 
Teb adjusted. For further discussion, refer to the How we measure and report our business segments section of this 2022 Annual Report. 

Seasonality 
Seasonal factors may impact our results in certain quarters. The first quarter has historically been stronger for our Capital 
Markets businesses. The second quarter has fewer days than the other quarters, which generally results in a decrease in net 
interest income and certain expense items. The third and fourth quarters include the summer months which generally results in 
lower client activity and may negatively impact the results of our Capital Markets trading business. 

Trend analysis 
Earnings over the period have been impacted by the factors noted below.  

Personal & Commercial Banking revenue has benefitted from solid volume growth in loans and deposits over the period. NIM 

has been favourably impacted by the rising interest rate environment over the last three quarters, whereas a low interest rate 
environment persisted in the earlier part of the period. 

Wealth Management revenue has benefitted from growth in average fee-based client assets, which is impacted by market 

conditions, and volume growth in loans and deposits over the period. The rising interest rate environment also favourably 
impacted revenue over the last three quarters, whereas a low interest rate environment persisted in the earlier part of the period. 
Insurance revenue has fluctuated over the period, primarily due to the impact of changes in the fair value of investments 

backing policyholder liabilities as well as the timing of group annuity sales, both of which are largely offset in PBCAE. Group 
annuity sales are generally higher in the first half of the fiscal year. 

Investor & Treasury Services revenue has been impacted by interest rate movements, market volatility and client activity 

over the period. 

54

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Capital Markets revenue is influenced, to a large extent, by market conditions that impact client activity. Trading revenue 

across the first half of the period benefitted from increased client activity. Beginning in the second quarter of 2022, there was a 
decline in global fee pools. Trading results were further impacted notably in the third quarter of 2022 amidst challenging market 
conditions, driving lower fixed income trading revenue, including the impact from loan underwriting markdowns. 

PCL is comprised of provisions taken on performing assets and provisions taken on impaired assets. PCL on performing 
assets has fluctuated over the period as it is impacted by changes in macroeconomic conditions, exposures and credit quality. 
Throughout 2021 and the first half of 2022, we saw improvements in our macroeconomic and credit quality outlook, as the 
economic impact from the COVID-19 pandemic eased in most regions, resulting in releases of provisions on performing assets. In 
the last half of 2022, unfavourable changes in our macroeconomic outlook resulted in an increase in provisions. PCL on impaired 
assets remained lower than pre-pandemic levels over the period. 

PBCAE has fluctuated over the period reflecting changes in the fair value of investments backing policyholder liabilities, 

which is impacted by changes in market conditions, as well as group annuity sales, both of which are largely offset in revenue. 
PBCAE has also fluctuated due to the impact of investment-related experience and claims costs over the period. Actuarial 
adjustments, which generally occur in the fourth quarter of each year, also impact PBCAE. 

Non-interest expense has been impacted by fluctuations in variable compensation over the period, commensurate with 

fluctuations in revenue and earnings. Changes in the fair value of our U.S. share-based compensation plans, which are largely 
offset in revenue, have also contributed to fluctuations over the period and are impacted by market conditions. While we 
continue to focus on efficiency management activities, expenses over the period also reflect investments in staff and technology 
and increases in discretionary spend, including marketing. The fourth quarter of 2021 included a legal provision in U.S. Wealth 
Management (including City National) that was partially released in the first quarter of 2022. 

Our effective income tax rate has fluctuated over the period, mostly due to varying levels of tax adjustments and changes in 

earnings mix. The second and fourth quarters of 2022 reflected the impact of net favourable tax adjustments and an increase in 
income from lower tax rate jurisdictions, respectively. 

Assets  
Cash and due from banks  
Interest-bearing deposits with banks  
Securities, net of applicable allowance (1)  
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowed  
Loans  

Financial condition  

Condensed balance sheets  

  

As at October 31 (Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Retail  
Wholesale  

Allowance for loan losses  
Other – Derivatives  

– Other (2)  

Total assets  

Liabilities  
Deposits  
Other – Derivatives  

– Other (2)  

Subordinated debentures  

Total liabilities  

Equity attributable to shareholders  
Non-controlling interests  

Total equity  

Total liabilities and equity  

$

72,397   $

2022  

  

108,011  
318,223  
317,845  
  
549,751  
273,967  
(3,753)  
154,439  
126,339  

Table 38   

2021  

  
113,846  
79,638  
284,724  
307,903  
  
503,598  
218,066  
(4,089)  
95,541  
107,096  

$ 1,917,219   $ 1,706,323  

  
  
$ 1,208,814   $ 1,100,831  
91,439  
405,698  
9,593  

153,491  
436,714  
10,025  

1,809,044  

1,607,561  

108,064  
111  

108,175  

98,667  
95  

98,762  

$ 1,917,219   $ 1,706,323  

Securities are comprised of trading and investment securities. 

(1) 
(2)  Other – Other assets and liabilities include Segregated fund net assets and liabilities, respectively. 

2022 vs. 2021 
Total assets increased $211 billion or 12% from last year. Foreign exchange translation increased total assets by $114 billion. 
Cash and due from banks was down $41 billion or 36%, primarily due to lower deposits with central banks, reflecting our 

liquidity and short-term cash management activities. 

Interest-bearing deposits with banks increased $28 billion or 36%, mainly due to higher deposits with central banks, 

reflecting our short-term cash and liquidity management activities. 

Securities, net of applicable allowance, were up $33 billion or 12%, mainly due to higher government securities, reflecting 

short-term market opportunities and liquidity management activities, and the impact of foreign exchange translation. These 
factors were partially offset by lower equity trading securities. 

Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements (reverse repos) and securities borrowed increased $10 billion or 3%, 

primarily due to the impact of foreign exchange translation and liquidity management activities, partially offset by decreased 
client demand. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

55 

Loans (net of Allowance for loan losses) were up $102 billion or 14%, primarily due to volume growth in wholesale loans and 

residential mortgages. The impact of foreign exchange translation also contributed to the increase. 

Derivative assets were up $59 billion or 62%, primarily attributable to the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
Other assets were up $19 billion or 18%, primarily reflecting higher cash collateral and margin deposits. The impact of foreign 

exchange translation also contributed to the increase. 

Total liabilities increased $201 billion or 13% from last year. Foreign exchange translation increased total liabilities by $114 billion. 

Deposits increased $108 billion or 10%, mainly due to issuances of long-term and short-term notes due to funding 
requirements and the impact of foreign exchange translation. Higher retail deposits also contributed to the increase. 

Derivative liabilities were up $62 billion or 68%, primarily attributable to the impact of foreign exchange translation and 

higher fair values on interest rate contracts, partially offset by lower fair values on foreign exchange contracts. 

Other liabilities increased $31 billion or 8%, primarily due to higher short-term borrowings of subsidiaries due to funding 

requirements, higher cash collateral and the impact of foreign exchange translation. 

Total equity increased $9 billion or 10%, mainly reflecting earnings, net of dividends, and other comprehensive income (OCI). 
These factors were partially offset by share repurchases. 

Off-balance sheet arrangements  

In the normal course of business, we engage in a variety of financial transactions that, for accounting purposes, are not recorded 
on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Off-balance sheet transactions are generally undertaken for risk, capital and funding 
management purposes which benefit us and our clients. These include transactions with structured entities and may also include 
the issuance of guarantees. These transactions give rise to, among other risks, varying degrees of market, credit, liquidity and 
funding risk, which are discussed in the Risk management section. 

We use structured entities to securitize our financial assets as well as assist our clients in securitizing their financial assets. 

These entities are not operating entities, typically have no employees, and may or may not be recorded on our Consolidated 
Balance Sheets. 

In the normal course of business, we engage in a variety of financial transactions that may qualify for derecognition. We 

apply the derecognition rules to determine whether we have transferred substantially all the risks and rewards or control 
associated with the financial assets to a third party. If the transaction meets specific criteria, it may qualify for full or partial 
derecognition from our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 

Securitizations of our financial assets 
We periodically securitize our credit card receivables and residential and commercial mortgage loans primarily to diversify our 
funding sources, enhance our liquidity position and for capital purposes. We also securitize residential and commercial 
mortgage loans as part of our sales and trading activities. 

We securitize our credit card receivables, on a revolving basis, through a consolidated structured entity. We securitize single 

and multiple-family residential mortgages through the National Housing Act Mortgage-Backed Securities (NHA MBS) program. 
The majority of our securitization activities are recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets as we do not meet the 
derecognition criteria. During 2022 and 2021, we did not derecognize any mortgages securitized through the NHA MBS program. 
For further details, refer to Note 7 and Note 8 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

We also periodically securitize commercial mortgage loans by selling them in collateral pools, which meet certain 
diversification, leverage and debt coverage criteria, to structured entities, one of which is sponsored by us. Securitized 
commercial mortgage loans are derecognized from our Consolidated Balance Sheets as we have transferred substantially all of 
the risks and rewards of ownership of the securitized assets. During the year ended October 31, 2022, we securitized $450 million 
of commercial mortgages (October 31, 2021 – $nil). Our continuing involvement with the transferred assets is limited to servicing 
certain of the underlying commercial mortgages sold. As at October 31, 2022, there was $2 billion of commercial mortgages 
outstanding that we continue to service related to these securitization activities (October 31, 2021 – $2 billion). 

Involvement with unconsolidated structured entities 
In the normal course of business, we engage in a variety of financial transactions with structured entities to support our 
customers’ financing and investing needs, including securitization of our clients’ financial assets, creation of investment 
products, and other types of structured financing. 

We have the ability to use credit mitigation tools such as third-party guarantees, credit default swaps, and collateral to 
mitigate risks assumed through securitization and re-securitization exposures. The process in place to monitor the credit quality 
of our securitization and re-securitization exposures involves, among other things, reviewing the performance data of the 
underlying assets. We affirm our ratings each quarter and formally confirm or assign a new rating at least annually. For further 
details on our activities to manage risks, refer to the Risk management section. 

Below is a description of our activities with respect to certain significant unconsolidated structured entities. For a complete 

discussion of our interests in consolidated and unconsolidated structured entities, refer to Note 8 of our 2022 Annual 
Consolidated Financial Statements. 

RBC-administered multi-seller conduits 
We administer multi-seller conduits which are used primarily for the securitization of our clients’ financial assets. Our clients 
primarily use our multi-seller conduits to diversify their financing sources and to reduce funding costs by leveraging the value of 
high-quality collateral. The conduits offer us a favourable revenue stream and risk-adjusted return. 

We provide services such as transaction structuring, administration, backstop liquidity facilities and partial credit 

enhancements to the multi-seller conduits. Revenue for all such services amounted to $296 million during the year (October 31, 
2021 – $304 million). 

Our total commitment to the conduits in the form of backstop liquidity and credit enhancement facilities is shown below. The 

total committed amount of these facilities exceeds the total amount of the maximum assets that may have to be purchased by 
the conduits under the purchase agreements. As a result, the maximum exposure to loss attributable to our backstop liquidity 
and credit enhancement facilities is less than the total committed amounts of these facilities. 

56

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Liquidity and credit enhancement facilities  

As at October 31 (Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Backstop liquidity facilities  
Credit enhancement facilities (3)  

Total  

Notional of  
committed  
amounts (1)  

2022  
Allocable  
notional  
amounts  

Maximum  
exposure  
to loss (2)  

Notional of  
committed  
amounts (1)  

Table 39   

2021  
Allocable  
notional  
amounts  

Maximum  
exposure  
to loss (2)  

$ 48,235   $ 45,261   $ 45,261   $ 40,876   $ 38,330  $ 38,330  
2,546  

2,546  

2,546  

2,974  

2,974  

2,974  

$ 51,209   $ 48,235   $ 48,235   $ 43,422   $ 40,876  $ 40,876  

Based on total committed financing limit. 

(1) 
(2)  Not presented in the table above are derivative assets with a fair value of $25 million (October 31, 2021 – $17 million) which are a component of our total maximum 

exposure to loss from our interests in the multi-seller conduits. Refer to Note 8 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements for more details. 
Includes $14 million (October 31, 2021 – $9 million) of Financial standby letters of credit. 

(3) 

As at October 31, 2022, the notional amount of backstop liquidity facilities we provide increased $7 billion or 18% from last year, 
primarily due to an increase in outstanding securitized assets of the multi-seller conduits as well as the impact of foreign 
exchange translation. The notional amount of partial credit enhancement facilities we provide increased $428 million or 17% from 
last year, primarily due to an increase in outstanding securitized assets of the multi-seller conduits. 

Maximum exposure to loss by client type  

Table 40   

  

  

As at October 31 (Millions of dollars)  

Outstanding securitized assets  

Auto and truck loans and leases  
Consumer loans  
Credit cards  
Dealer floor plan receivables  
Equipment receivables  
Fleet finance receivables  
Insurance premiums  
Residential mortgages  
Student loans  
Trade receivables  
Transportation finance  

Total  

Canadian equivalent  

2022  

2021  

US$  

  

$ 10,553   $
3,198  
4,932  
1,012  
2,291  
785  
143  
–  
2,013  
2,306  
2,119  

C$  

  

Total C$  

  

US$  

  

3,967   $ 18,351   $ 11,546   $
4,359  
7,441  
1,960  
3,365  
1,283  
624  
1,785  
2,882  
3,144  
3,041  

–  
719  
580  
243  
213  
428  
1,785  
139  
–  
153  

2,466  
3,876  
906  
2,227  
366  
170  
–  
1,587  
2,337  
2,163  

C$  

Total C$  

  

  
3,752   $ 18,048  
3,054  
5,309  
1,892  
2,757  
667  
638  
873  
1,965  
2,893  
2,780  

–  
510  
770  
–  
213  
428  
873  
–  
–  
102  

$ 29,352   $

8,227   $ 48,235   $ 27,644   $

6,648   $ 40,876  

$ 40,007   $

8,227   $ 48,235   $ 34,228   $

6,648   $ 40,876  

Our overall exposure increased 18% compared to last year, primarily due to an increase in the outstanding securitized assets of 
the multi-seller conduits as well as the impact of foreign exchange translation. Correspondingly, total assets of the multi-seller 
conduits increased $7 billion or 18% from last year, also primarily due to an increase in outstanding securitized assets in the 
multi-seller conduits as well as the impact of foreign exchange. All of the multi-seller conduits transactions were internally rated 
A or above. All transactions funded by the unconsolidated multi-seller conduits are internally rated using a rating system as 
outlined in the internal ratings map in the credit risk section. 

Multiple independent debt rating agencies review all of the transactions in the multi-seller conduits. Transactions financed in 

the U.S. multi-seller conduits are reviewed by Moody’s Investors Service (Moody’s), Standard & Poor’s (S&P) and Fitch Ratings 
(Fitch). Transactions in two of the Canadian multi-seller conduits are reviewed by DBRS Morningstar (DBRS) and Moody’s while 
one of the Canadian multi-seller conduits is also reviewed by S&P. Each applicable rating agency also reviews ongoing transaction 
performance on a monthly basis and may publish reports detailing portfolio and program information related to the conduits. 

As at October 31, 2022, the total asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) issued by the conduits amounted to $33 billion, an 

increase of $8 billion or 32% from last year, primarily due to higher client usage. The rating agencies that rate the ABCP rated 
100% (October 31, 2021 – 100%) of the total amount issued within the top ratings category. 

Structured finance 
We provide liquidity facilities to certain municipal bond tender option bond trusts in which we have an interest but do not 
consolidate because the residual certificates issued by the tender option bond trusts are held by third parties. As at October 31, 
2022, our maximum exposure to loss from these unconsolidated municipal bond tender option bond trusts was $3 billion 
(October 31, 2021 – $3 billion). 

We provide senior warehouse financing to unaffiliated structured entities that are established by third parties to acquire 

loans and issue term collateralized loan obligations (CLO). Subordinated financing is provided during the warehouse phase by 
either the collateral manager or third-party investors. Subordinated financing serves as the first loss tranche which absorbs 
losses prior to ourselves as the senior lender. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the term CLO is used to fully repay the 
senior warehouse financing that we provide. As at October 31, 2022, our maximum exposure to loss associated with the 
outstanding senior warehouse financing facilities was $640 million (October 31, 2021 – $951 million). The decrease in our 
maximum exposure to loss from last year was driven by repayments of existing financing facilities partially offset by the impact 
of foreign exchange translation. 

We provide senior financing to unaffiliated structured entities that are established by third parties to acquire loans. 
Subordinated financing is provided by either the collateral manager or third-party investors. Subordinated financing serves as 
the first loss tranche which absorb losses prior to ourselves as the senior lender. These facilities tend to be longer in term than 
the CLO warehouse facilities and benefit from credit enhancement designed to cover a multiple of historical losses. As at 
October 31, 2022, our maximum exposure to loss associated with the outstanding senior financing facilities was $5 billion 
(October 31, 2021 – $4 billion). The increase in our maximum exposure to loss from last year was driven by the addition of new 
financing facilities as well as the impact of foreign exchange translation. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

57 

Investment funds 
We invest in hedge funds primarily to provide clients with desired exposures to reference funds. As we make investments in the 
reference funds, exposures to the funds are simultaneously transferred to clients through derivative transactions. Our maximum 
exposure to loss in the reference funds is limited to our investments in the funds. As at October 31, 2022, our maximum exposure 
to loss was $3 billion (October 31, 2021 – $3 billion).  

We also provide liquidity facilities to certain third-party investment funds. The funds issue unsecured variable-rate preferred 

shares and invest in portfolios of tax exempt bonds. As at October 31, 2022, our maximum exposure to loss on these funds was 
$667 million (October 31, 2021 – $606 million). The increase in our maximum exposure to loss from last year was driven by the 
addition of new financing facilities as well as the impact of foreign exchange translation. 

Third-party securitization vehicles 
We hold interests in certain unconsolidated third-party securitization vehicles, which are structured entities. We, as well as other 
financial institutions, are obligated to provide funding to these entities up to our maximum commitment level and are exposed to 
credit losses on the underlying assets after various credit enhancements. As at October 31, 2022, our maximum exposure to loss 
in these entities was $14 billion (October 31, 2021 – $12 billion). The increase in our maximum exposure to loss compared to last 
year reflects an increase in client activity with third-party securitization vehicles. Interest and non-interest income earned in 
respect of these investments was $186 million (October 31, 2021 – $89 million). 

Guarantees, retail and commercial commitments 
We provide our clients with guarantees and commitments that expose us to liquidity and funding risks. Our maximum potential 
amount of future payments in relation to our commitments and guarantee products as at October 31, 2022 amounted to 
$453 billion compared to $414 billion last year, primarily driven by the impact of foreign exchange translation and volume growth 
in other commitments to extend credit. Refer to Liquidity and funding risk and Note 24 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial 
Statements for details regarding our guarantees and commitments. 

We are in the business of managing the risks inherent to the financial services industry as we aim to create maximum value for 
our shareholders, clients, employees and communities. The ability to manage risk is a core competency of the bank, and is 
supported by our risk-aware culture and risk management approach. Our view of risks is dynamic, and reflects the pace of 
change in the financial services industry. 

Risk management  

Top and emerging risks  

An important component of our risk management approach is to ensure that top and emerging risks, as they evolve, are 
identified, managed, and incorporated into our existing risk management assessment, measurement, monitoring and escalation 
processes and addressed in our risk frameworks and policies. These practices are intended to ensure a forward-looking risk 
assessment is maintained by management in the course of business development and as part of the execution of ongoing risk 
oversight responsibilities. Top and emerging risks are discussed by senior management and the Board on a regular basis. 
We have developed supplementary internal guidance to support enterprise-wide identification and assessment of all 
material risks, including those that are not readily apparent. Top and emerging risks encompass those that could materially 
impact our financial results, financial and operational resilience, reputation, business model, or strategy, as well as those that 
may materially impact us as the risks evolve. The following represents our top and emerging risks: 

Top & emerging risks  

Description  

Business and economic  
conditions  

  

Our financial results are affected to varying degrees by the general business and economic conditions in  
the geographic regions in which we operate. These conditions may include factors such as: consumer  
saving and spending habits; consumer borrowing and repayment patterns; unemployment rates; the  
differing economic trajectories among nations across the globe, global tensions and geopolitical  
uncertainty; the level of business investment and overall business sentiment; trade; the direction of the  
COVID-19 pandemic and the emergence of new pathogens; the level of government spending as well as  
fiscal and monetary policy; the level of activity and volatility of the financial markets; disruptions to  
energy and other commodity markets; competitiveness; supply chain challenges and labour shortages  
affecting certain sectors; the evolution of elevated inflationary pressures; and possible stagflation or  
deflation. Moreover, interest rate changes and actions taken by central banks to manage inflation or the  
broader economy have implications for us. Our financial results are sensitive to changes in interest  
rates, as described in the Systemic risk section.  

For example, a slowdown in economic growth or an economic downturn could adversely impact  
employment rates and household incomes, consumer spending, housing prices, corporate earnings and  
business investment and could adversely affect our business, including but not limited to the demand for  
our loan and other products, and result in lower earnings, including higher credit losses. In addition to  
risks arising from monetary policy tightening, risks are also emerging around how governments will seek  
to recoup pandemic-related support, or any new support provided to deal with emerging economic  
challenges. This may include, for example, changes to tax policy to address fiscal capacity concerns and  
to balance budgets in the future.  

There are also emerging risks related to wealth and income inequality, as well as changing  
demographics and immigration, which could impact the labour market, inflation, demand and consumer  
trends, and potentially have broader societal and government policy implications.  

58

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Top & emerging risks  

Description  

Canadian housing and  
household indebtedness  

Information technology and  
cyber risks  

Geopolitical uncertainty  

Notwithstanding currently low unemployment rates, Canadian housing and household indebtedness  
risks remain heightened in the current rising interest rate environment. Concerns related to elevated  
levels of mortgage-related Canadian household debt, which accelerated during the COVID-19 pandemic,  
could escalate if the BoC continues to increase interest rates, if the current period of elevated inflation is  
prolonged or if unemployment increases, potentially resulting in, among other things, higher credit  
losses. Moreover, continued interest rate increases or slowing economic growth could adversely impact  
housing market activity and housing prices, which could push loan-to-value (LTV) ratios higher and  
further increase credit losses.  

While real estate rental activity has rebounded in certain markets, changing consumer preferences and  
work arrangements, and the impact from elevated borrowing costs, may continue to have an adverse  
impact on future real estate investment and demand.  

Information technology (IT) and cyber risks remain top risks, not only for the financial services sector,  
but for other industries worldwide. Geopolitical tensions have increased the risk of nation state actors  
attacking critical infrastructure, including banks and critical third-party suppliers (e.g., utilities, telecom  
providers, etc.). We continue to be subject to the heightened inherent risk of cyber-attacks, data  
breaches, cyber extortion and similar compromises, due to: (i) the size, scale, and global nature of our  
operations; (ii) our heavy reliance on the internet to conduct day-to-day business activities; (iii) our  
intricate technological infrastructure; and (iv) our reliance on third-party service providers. Ransomware  
threats are growing in sophistication and being used to launch major supply chain attacks. Additionally,  
clients’ use of personal devices can create further avenues for potential cyber-related incidents, as the  
bank has little or no control over the safety of these devices. Resulting implications could include  
business interruptions, client service disruptions, financial loss, theft of intellectual property and  
confidential information, litigation, enhanced regulatory attention and penalties, as well as reputational  
damage. Furthermore, the adoption of emerging technologies, such as cloud computing, Artificial  
Intelligence (AI) and robotics, call for continued focus and investment to manage risks effectively. For  
more details on how we are managing these risks, refer to the Operational risk section.  

In 2022, the Russia-Ukraine conflict upended the geopolitical landscape, with wide-ranging impacts to  
the global economy and markets. The duration and path of the conflict remains uncertain, and could  
continue to fuel, or exacerbate global tensions, energy and other commodity shortages, supply chain  
disruptions, inflationary pressures, weakening sentiment and growth prospects, market volatility,  
cyberattacks, and the proliferation of sanctions and trade measures. Europe, in particular, faces  
significant uncertainty given its dependence on Russia for energy imports and its weakening economic  
prospects. Furthermore, the Canadian economy is vulnerable to continued trade tensions given the  
country’s trading relationships with the U.S. and China. Tensions remain elevated between China and the  
U.S. and its allies over a number of issues, including trade, technology, human rights, Taiwan, Hong Kong,  
and Macau. Tensions between China and its neighbours over territorial claims, and the prospect of even  
closer relations between China and Russia, add further global and economic uncertainty. Other  
geopolitical tensions could also add to economic and market uncertainties. In addition, an uncertain  
geopolitical or economic environment could lead to increases in polarization, social unrest, or terrorism,  
each of which could have direct or indirect impacts to the bank.  

More broadly, the future of global trade remains uncertain, as countries look to decrease reliance on the  
global supply chain and nations with differing values. Increased protectionism and economic  
nationalism could reshape global alliances as the supply of critical goods of economic and national  
importance (e.g., energy, semiconductors) remains one of the top priorities of governments. We will  
continue to monitor these developments and others, and will assess the implications they have on us.  

Environmental and  
social risk  
(including climate change)  

We, like other organizations, are increasingly under scrutiny to address social and racial inequality and  
other human rights issues, and failure to do so may result in strategic, regulatory and reputation risks.  

Risks associated with climate change are evolving as it relates to the global transition to a net-zero  
economy and physical climate risks (e.g., extreme weather events).  

Digital disruption  
and innovation  

Environmental and social risks, including climate change, are each unique and transverse risks  
impacting our principal risk types in different ways and to varying degrees. While E&S risk manifests  
itself through credit, reputation, and regulatory compliance risks, the impact of E&S risk also extends to  
our other principal risks, including systemic, competitive, strategic, legal and regulatory environment,  
operational, market, liquidity and insurance risks.  

For details on these risks and how we are managing these risks, refer to the Overview of other risks  
section.  

The COVID-19 pandemic changed the way consumers interact with financial services providers, including  
increasing demand for digital banking services. While this represents an opportunity for us to leverage our  
use of technology, the need to meet the rapidly evolving needs of clients and compete with non-traditional  
competitors has increased our strategic and reputation risks. Additional risks continue to emerge, as  
demographic trends, evolving client expectations, the increased power to analyze data and the  
emergence of disruptors are creating competitive pressures across a number of sectors. Moreover,  
established technology companies, newer competitors, and regulatory changes continue to foster new  
business models that are challenging or could challenge traditional banks and financial products. Finally,  
while the adoption of new technologies, such as AI and machine learning, presents opportunities for us, it  
is resulting or could result in new and complex strategic, operational, regulatory, compliance and  
reputation risks that would need to be managed effectively.  

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

59 

  

  

  

  

  

Top & emerging risks  

Description  

Privacy, data and third-party  
related risks  

The protection and responsible use of personal information are critical to maintaining our clients’ trust. In  
addition, the management and governance of our data also remains a top risk given the high value  
attributed to our data for the insights it can generate for clients and communities. Resulting implications  
from failing to manage data and privacy risks could include financial loss, theft of intellectual property  
and/or confidential information, litigation, enhanced regulatory attention and penalties, as well as  
reputational damage. Effective privacy and information management practices continue to grow in  
importance, as demonstrated by the continued development of complex regulations in the jurisdictions in  
which we operate. Our potential exposure to these risks increases as we continue to partner with third-
party service providers and adopt new business models and technologies (e.g., cloud computing, AI and  
machine learning). Threat actors gravitate towards vulnerabilities in an ecosystem, and the weakest link  
in the supply chain can be a supplier or third-party service provider that may not have sufficiently robust  
controls. Privacy, data and third-party related risks have been heightened as the use of work from home  
arrangements remains common practice. Third-party providers critical to our operations are monitored  
for any impact on their ability to deliver services, including vendors of our third-party providers. For  
details on how we are managing these risks, refer to the Operational risk section.  

  

Regulatory changes  

The ongoing introduction of new or revised regulations requires enhanced focus across the organization  
on meeting additional regulatory requirements across the multiple jurisdictions in which we operate.  
Financial and other reforms that have been implemented or are being implemented, across multiple  
jurisdictions, such as digital, data and technology reforms, cyber security and anti-money laundering  
regulations, interest rate benchmark reform, as well as privacy, climate and consumer protection,  
continue to impact our operations and strategies. For more details, refer to the Legal and regulatory  
environment risk section.  

Culture and conduct risks  

  

  

Overview  

Our Purpose, values and risk principles are key dimensions of our culture. We demonstrate our culture  
through our conduct – the behaviours, decisions, and actions of the organization and our employees.  
Culture and conduct risks are considered top risks for the financial services industry due to the impact  
that our choices, behaviours, and overall risk governance can have on outcomes for our stakeholders.  
We embed client considerations into our decision-making processes and aim to focus on the fair  
treatment of clients, and continue to implement regulatory changes that align with this objective. We are  
responsive to evolving employee needs while expecting employees to always act with integrity.  

Regulators continue to focus on conduct matters and risks, and heightened expectations generally from  
regulators could lead to investigations, remediation requirements, higher compliance costs and  
enforcement actions and fines, and potential criminal prosecutions or imposition of sanctions, including  
restrictions on our activities. While we take steps to continue to strengthen our conduct practices, and  
prevent and detect outcomes which could potentially harm clients, employees or the integrity of the  
markets, such outcomes may not always be prevented or detected. For more details, refer to the Culture  
and conduct risks section.  

As a global financial institution with a diversified business model, we actively manage a variety of risks to help protect and 
enable our businesses by following these risk management principles: 

Risk management principles 

(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)

Effectively balance risk and reward to enable sustainable growth. 
Collectively share the responsibility for risk management. 
Undertake only risks we understand and make thoughtful and future-focused risk decisions. 
Always uphold our Purpose and vision, and consistently abide by our values and Code of Conduct to maintain our 
reputation and the trust of our clients, colleagues and communities. 

(cid:129) Maintain a healthy and robust control environment to protect our stakeholders. 
(cid:129)
(cid:129)

Use judgment and common sense. 
Always be operationally prepared and financially resilient for a potential crisis. 

The dynamic nature of the financial services industry, and technological innovation, necessitate that our processes, tools and 
practices are continuously improving and responding to the changing landscape and emerging risks. We seek to accomplish this 
through an effective and evolving risk management approach. All risk-taking activities and exposures are within the Board-
approved risk appetite, and corresponding capital and liquidity requirements. We seek to ensure that our business activities and 
transactions provide an appropriate balance of return for the risks assumed and the costs incurred. Our organizational design 
and governance processes are intended to ensure that our Group Risk Management (GRM) function is independent from the 
businesses it supports. 

Risk drivers 
We define risk as the potential vulnerabilities in the short-, medium- or long-term that may impact our financial results, financial 
and operational resilience, reputation, business model, or strategy. Risk can be realized through losses, or an undesirable 
outcome with respect to volatility of earnings in relation to expected earnings, capital adequacy, or liquidity. Our principal risks 
include credit, market, liquidity, insurance, operational, regulatory compliance, strategic, reputation, legal and regulatory 
environment, competitive, and systemic risks, that have been classified into four categories based on the level of control and 

60

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

influence that we can exert against these risks. These categories are maintained by GRM and reviewed regularly to ensure all 
principal risks are reflected. This classification methodology provides a common language and discipline for the identification 
and assessment of risk in existing businesses, new businesses, products or initiatives, as well as acquisitions and alliances. 

LessLess

e
c
n
e
u
ﬂ
n
i
 

d
n
a
 
l
o
r
t
n
o
C

MoreMore

Macroeconomic

Strategic

Adverse changes in the macroeconomic environment can lead to a material impact on the real economy or
the ﬁnancial system in any of the regions in which we operate. 
– Examples include rising inﬂationary pressures and interest rates, economic slowdowns or recessions,
    deterioration in the Canadian housing market, abrupt changes in the geopolitical environment,
    unfavourable global trade agreements, political uncertainties, or the outbreak of a pandemic or other
    health crises.
Resultant impacts can materialize as loss of revenue, as well as the realization of credit, market or
operational risk losses.
Macroeconomic risk is the least controllable type of risk arising from the business environment in which we
operate.
However, we have in place a number of controls to mitigate the impacts of systemic risk, including our
diversiﬁed business model and funding sources, ﬁnancial crisis management strategies and protocols,
stress testing programs, and product and geographic diversiﬁcation.

Business strategy is a major driver of our risk appetite, including acquisitions and dispositions, responses to
threats posed by non-traditional competitors and responses to proposed changes in the regulatory
environment.
Choosing the wrong strategy, or poorly executing on the correct strategy, could result in reputational risk
consequences, impact our revenue mix, and/or affect our exposure to earnings volatility and loss absorption
capacity.
There is a fair degree of control and inﬂuence that we can exert in managing strategic and reputation risk. 
While the legal and regulatory environment and competitive risks are less controllable, we seek to inﬂuence
them through our role as a corporate entity and as an active participant in the Canadian and global ﬁnancial
services industry.

Operational /
Regulatory
Compliance

The complexity and scope of our operations across the globe exposes us to operational and regulatory
compliance risks.
We have a certain level of control over these risks through the effective management of operational risk and
regulatory compliance risk, including how we manage our dependence on people, systems, and processes,
as well as how we respond to external events.

Transactional /
Positional

A more traditional risk perspective involves credit, market, liquidity and insurance risks arising from, among
other things, lending transactions and balance sheet positions. These risks are an integral part of our
day-to-day business activities. 
We understand these risks well and have the greatest level of control and inﬂuence over them.
We earn revenue by taking these transactional / positional risks.

 

Enterprise risk management  

Under the oversight of the Board and senior management, the Enterprise Risk Management Framework (ERMF) provides an 
overview of our enterprise-wide programs for managing risk, including identifying, assessing, measuring, controlling, monitoring 
and reporting on the significant risks that face the organization. 

Risk governance 
We have an effective and well-established governance framework in place so that risks impacting our businesses are identified, 
appropriately categorized, assessed, managed and communicated to the Board in a timely manner. The risk governance 
framework has been established, and is maintained in alignment with, the expectations of OSFI, the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision’s (BCBS) corporate governance principles, and the requirements and expectations of other regulators in the 
jurisdictions in which we conduct business, and in accordance with industry best practices. The Board oversees the 
implementation of our risk management framework, while employees at all levels of the organization are responsible for 
managing the day-to-day risks that arise in the context of their mandates. As illustrated below, we use the three lines of defence 
governance model so that risks are appropriately and adequately managed throughout the enterprise to achieve our strategic 
objectives. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

61 

RISK COMMITTEE

AUDIT COMMITTEE

GOVERNANCE COMMITTEE

HUMAN RESOURCES COMMITTEE

 

BOARD OF DIRECTORS

The Board annually approves our Code of Conduct and closely collaborates with management to set the tone from above and promotes a strong governance
culture that inﬂuences RBC at every level and across all global businesses. The Board also approves our risk appetite, provides oversight and carries out its
risk management mandate primarily through its committees:
The Risk Committee assists the Board in overseeing our risk management program ensuring that management has policies, processes and procedures to
manage our signiﬁcant risks and monitor our risk posture and risk proﬁle. The Risk Committee oversees the risk management function, having regard to its
independence from the businesses whose activities it reviews. Its oversight activities include the review of the GRM function which evaluates GRM’s success
against its key priorities, the mandate of the Chief Risk Ofﬁcer (CRO), and GRM’s organizational structure, budget and resources.
The Audit Committee assists the Board in its oversight of (i) the integrity of our ﬁnancial statements; (ii) the qualiﬁcations, performance and independence of
our external auditors; (iii) the performance of our internal audit function, (iv) internal controls; and (v) compliance with legal and regulatory requirements.
The Governance Committee recommends individuals for Board member election or re-election, oversees the process for evaluating Board Committee and
director effectiveness, and oversees management of conduct and culture, including breaches of our Code of Conduct. Additional responsibilities include
(i) developing and recommending governance frameworks, principles and policies to the Board; (ii) overseeing and coordinating ESG matters at the Board
and its committees; (iii) monitoring developments in corporate governance and adapting best practices; and (iv) reviewing shareholder proposals and
recommending responses to the Board.
The Human Resources Committee assists the Board in its oversight of compensation policies and programs, compensation risk management and the
compensation for the CEO and Group Executives (GE). It also oversees our pension plans, key talent management and human resources strategies and
practices, including employee engagement, diversity & inclusion and health & wellness, as well as succession plans for key senior leadership roles.

THE GROUP EXECUTIVE AND GROUP RISK COMMITTEE

Actively shapes enterprise risk appetite and recommends it for Board approval.
Visibly supports and communicates enterprise risk appetite, seeking to ensure that sufﬁcient resources and expertise are in place to help
provide effective oversight of adherence to the enterprise risk appetite.
Seeks to ensure principles, policies, authorities, resources, responsibilities and reporting are in place to support the control infrastructure
necessary for an effective enterprise-wide risk management program.  
Oversees culture and conduct program and key activities.
Provides appropriate and timely information to the Board or its Committees with regard to the identiﬁcation, measurement, and management
of the signiﬁcant risks to which we are exposed across all of our legal entities, businesses and operations globally.
The Compensation Risk Management Oversight Committee (CRMOC) oversees the design of major compensation programs in an effort to ensure
alignment with sound risk management principles, and that risks that may not be fully captured in our current ﬁnancial performance are
appropriately considered in variable compensation payouts, including our enterprise risk proﬁle relative to risk appetite. The CRMOC has
responsibility for ensuring our compensation programs align with the Financial Stability Board (FSB) Principles for Sound Compensation
Practices and Implementation Standards and other applicable guidance and best practices.   

FIRST LINE OF DEFENCE

SECOND LINE OF DEFENCE

THIRD LINE OF DEFENCE

RISK OWNERS
RISK OWNERS

RISK OVERSIGHT
RISK OVERSIGHT

INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE
INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE

All employees across our businesses
and functional areas
Accountable for:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Identiﬁcation;
 Assessment;
 Measurement;
 Mitigation;
 Monitoring; and
 Reporting of risk against approved
 policies and appetite

RISK
MANAGEMENT

GLOBAL
COMPLIANCE AND
ANTI- MONEY
LAUNDERING

The CRO has direct access to the
Risk Committee
The Chief Compliance Ofﬁcer (CCO) and the
Chief Anti-Money Laundering Ofﬁcer (CAMLO)
have direct access to the Audit Committee
Establishes risk management practices and
provides risk guidance
Provides oversight of the effectiveness of
First Line risk management practices
Monitors and independently reports on the
level of risk against established risk appetite

Internal Audit
Independent assurance to management
and the Board on the effectiveness of
risk management practices

 

62

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Risk appetite 
Effective risk management protects us from unacceptable  
losses or undesirable outcomes with respect to earnings  
volatility, capital adequacy or liquidity, reputation risk or other  
risks while supporting and enabling our overall business  
strategy. It requires the clear articulation of our risk appetite,  
which is the amount and type of risk that we are able and willing  
to accept in the pursuit of our business objectives. It reflects our  
self-imposed upper bound to risk-taking, set at levels inside of  
regulatory limits and constraints, and influences our risk  
management philosophy, Code of Conduct, business practices  
and resource allocation. It provides clear boundaries and sets  
an overall tone for balancing risk-reward trade-offs to ensure  
the long-term viability of the organization.  

Our risk appetite is integrated into our strategic, financial,  

and capital planning processes, as well as ongoing business  
decision-making processes and is reviewed and approved  
annually by the Board.  

Our Enterprise Risk Appetite Framework (ERAF) outlines the  

foundational aspects of our approach to risk appetite,  
articulates our quantitative and qualitative risk appetite  
statements and their supporting measures and associated  
constraints, which can be applied at the enterprise, business  
segment, business unit and legal entity level, and describes our  
requirements and expectations to embed effective risk appetite  
practices throughout the organization.  

   (cid:129) Manage earnings volatility and exposure to future  

(cid:129)
(cid:129)

(cid:129)

losses under normal and stressed conditions.  
Avoid excessive concentrations of risk.  
Ensure capital adequacy and sound management of  
liquidity and funding risk.  
Ensure sound management of operational and  
regulatory compliance risk.  

(cid:129) Maintain strong credit ratings and a risk profile in the  

top half of our peer group.  

k   A p p e t ite Components

Risk Capacity

R i s

Risk Appetite &
Board Delegated Authorities

Risk Limits &
Management Delegated
Authorities

Risk Proﬁle 

Risk Posture

  

  
  

  

  (cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

Always uphold our Purpose and vision and  
consistently abide by our values and Code of Conduct  
to maintain our reputation and the trust of our  
clients, colleagues, and communities.  
Undertake only risk we understand. Make thoughtful  
and future-focused risk decisions, taking  
environmental and social considerations into  
account.  
Effectively balance risk and reward to enable  
sustainable growth.  

(cid:129) Maintain a healthy and robust control environment to  

protect our stakeholders.  
Always be operationally prepared and financially  
resilient for a potential crisis.  

  

  

Quantitative statements  

Qualitative statements  

Risk appetite statements  
  

  

  

  

  

  

The allocation of our risk appetite across the bank is supported by the establishment of delegated authorities or risk limits. 
These delegated authorities or risk limits represent the maximum level of risk permitted for a line of business, portfolio, 
individual or group and are used to govern ongoing operations. Risk posture, the anticipated shift in risk profile as a result of 
changes in objectives, strategies, and external factors, is used to provide insights on key areas that may require management 
attention to ensure strategies are able to be executed successfully within our risk appetite. 

Risk measurement 
Quantifying risk is a key component of our enterprise-wide risk and capital management processes. Risk measurement and 
planning processes are integrated across the enterprise, especially in regards to forward-looking projections and analyses, 
including but not limited to, stress testing, recovery and resolution planning, and credit provisioning. The degree of integration 
across our Finance and Risk functions continues to increase in measuring both financial and risk performance. 

Certain risks, such as credit, market, liquidity and insurance risks, can be more easily quantified than others, such as 

operational, reputation, strategic, legal, and regulatory compliance risks. For the risks that are more difficult to quantify, greater 
emphasis is placed on qualitative risk factors and assessment of activities to gauge the overall level of risk. In addition, 
judgmental risk measures and techniques such as stress testing, and scenario and sensitivity analyses can be used to assess and 
measure risks, and we are continuously evolving our risk measures and techniques to manage our risks. Our primary methods for 
measuring risk include: 
(cid:129)

Quantifying expected loss: losses that are statistically expected to occur as a result of conducting business in a given time 
period; 
Quantifying unexpected loss: an estimate of the deviation of actual earnings from expected earnings, over a specified time 
horizon; 
Stress testing: evaluates, from a forward looking perspective, the potential effects of a set of specified changes in risk 
factors, corresponding to exceptional but plausible adverse economic and financial market events; and 
Back-testing: the realized values are compared to the parameter estimates that are currently used in an effort to ensure the 
parameters remain appropriate for regulatory and economic capital calculations. 

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

63 

Assessing the viability of long-term business plans and strategies; 

Stress testing 
Stress testing is an important component of our risk management framework. Stress testing results are used for: 
(cid:129)
(cid:129) Monitoring our risk profile relative to our risk appetite in terms of earnings and capital at risk; 
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)

Setting limits; 
Identifying key risks to, and potential shifts in, our capital and liquidity levels, as well as our financial position; 
Enhancing our understanding of available mitigating actions in response to potential adverse events; and 
Assessing the adequacy of our capital and liquidity levels. 

Our enterprise-wide stress tests evaluate key balance sheet, income statement, leverage, capital, and liquidity impacts arising 
from risk exposures and changes in earnings. The results are used by the Board, Group Risk Committee (GRC) and senior 
management risk committees to understand our performance drivers under stress, and review stressed capital, leverage, and 
liquidity ratios against regulatory thresholds and internal limits. The results are also incorporated into our Internal Capital 
Adequacy Assessment Process (ICAAP) and capital plan analyses. 

We evaluate a number of enterprise-wide stress scenarios over a multi-year horizon, featuring a range of severities. Our 

Board reviews the recommended scenarios, and GRM leads the scenario assessment process. Results from across the 
organization are integrated to develop an enterprise-wide view of the impacts, with input from subject matter experts in GRM, 
Corporate Treasury, Finance, and Economics. Generally, our stress testing scenarios evaluate global recessions, equity market 
corrections, elevated debt levels, trade policies, changes in interest rates, real estate price corrections, and shocks to credit 
spreads and commodity markets, among other factors. During our fiscal 2022 stress testing exercises, we addressed several 
emerging risks inclusive of inflation risk, supply chain pressures as well as physical and transitional climate risk, with a focus on 
the impacts of these risks on revenue, net income and capital projections. 

Ongoing stress testing and scenario analyses within specific risk types, such as market risk (including Interest Rate Risk in 
the Banking Book (IRRBB)), liquidity risk, retail and wholesale credit risk, operational risk, and insurance risk, supplement and 
support our enterprise-wide analyses. Results from these risk-specific programs are used in a variety of decision-making 
processes including risk limit setting, portfolio composition evaluation, risk appetite articulation and business strategy 
implementation. 

In addition to ongoing enterprise-wide and risk-specific stress testing programs, we use ad hoc and reverse stress testing to 
deepen our knowledge of the risks we face. Ad hoc stress tests are one-off analyses used to investigate developing conditions or 
to stress a particular portfolio in more depth. Reverse stress tests, starting with a severe outcome and aiming to reverse-
engineer scenarios that might lead to it, are used in risk identification and understanding of risk/return boundaries. 

In addition to internal stress tests, we participate in a number of regulator-required stress test exercises, on a periodic basis, 
across several jurisdictions. 

Model governance and validation 
Quantitative models are used for many purposes including, but not limited to, the valuation of financial products, the 
identification, measurement and management of different types of risk, stress testing, assessing capital adequacy, informing 
business and risk decisions, measuring compliance with internal limits, meeting financial reporting and regulatory requirements, 
and issuing public disclosures. 

Model risk is the risk of adverse financial and/or reputational consequences to the enterprise arising from the use or misuse 
of a model at any stage throughout its life cycle and is managed through our model risk governance and oversight structure. The 
governance and oversight structure, which is implemented through our three lines of defence governance model, is founded on 
the basis that model risk management is a shared responsibility across the three lines spanning all stages of the model’s life 
cycle. We continue to evolve our governance model to seek to take into account any new risk considerations that may emerge 
from the growing use of AI methods and applications in our models across our organization. 

Prior to being used, models are subject to independent validation and approval by our enterprise model risk management 
function, a team of modelling professionals with reporting lines independent of those of the model owners, developers and users. 
The validation seeks to ensure that models are sound and capable of fulfilling their intended use. In addition to independently 
validating models prior to use, our enterprise model risk management function provides controls that span the life-cycle of a 
model, including model change management procedures, requirements for ongoing monitoring, and annual assessments to 
ensure each model continues to serve its intended purpose. 

Risk control 
Our enterprise-wide risk management approach is supported by a comprehensive set of risk controls that are defined in our 
ERMF. The ERMF serves as the foundation for our approach to risk management and sets the expectations for the development 
and communication of policies, the establishment of formal independent risk review and approval processes, and the 
establishment of delegated risk approval authorities and risk limits. The ERMF is further reinforced and supported by a number of 
additional Board-approved risk frameworks, various policies thereunder and a comprehensive set of risk controls. Together, our 
risk frameworks and supporting policies provide direction and insight on how respective risks are identified, assessed, measured, 
managed, mitigated, monitored and reported. The enterprise-wide policies are considered our minimum requirements, 
articulating the parameters within which business groups and employees must operate. 

64

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Enterprise Risk Policy Architecture

Enterprise Risk Management
Framework 

Enterprise Culture and
Conduct Risks
Framework

Enterprise Risk Appetite
Framework

Credit Risk
Management
Framework

Market Risk
Management
Framework

Operational
Risk
Management
Framework

Information
Technology
Risk
Management
Framework

Reputation
Risk
Management
Framework

Regulatory
Compliance
Management
Framework

Insurance
Risk
Management
Framework

Capital
Management
Framework

Liquidity
Risk
Management
Framework

Data
Management
Framework

Supporting Risk-Speciﬁc Enterprise-Wide Policies (examples)

Credit Risk
Mitigation
Policy

Market Risk
Policy

Internal
Controls
Management
Policy

Information
Security
Policy

Fiduciary
Risk Policy

Privacy Risk
Management
Policy

Insurance
Risk
Mitigation
Policy

Dividends
& Capital
Note Coupons
Policy

Liquidity
Risk Policy

Data Policy

Enterprise-Wide Policies for Multiple Risk Types
(e.g. Product and Suitability Risk Policy; Policy on Risk Limits and Risk Approval Authorities; Stress-Testing Policy)

Segment or Region Speciﬁc Risk Policy and Procedures

The approval hierarchy for risk frameworks and policy documents:

Board of Directors or Board Committees

Senior Management Committees (e.g. Policy Review Committee, Operational Risk Committee, Asset Liability Committee) for most policies.
Board or Board Committee approval is required in some instances (e.g. RBC Code of Conduct, Dividend Policy)

Generally by business or Functional Unit management/committees. Group Risk Management approval is required if there are signiﬁcant
risk implications

 

Delegated risk approval authorities and risk limits 
Risk Appetite is designed to account for strategic and forward-looking considerations whereas delegated authorities and risk 
limits are used to govern and monitor our day-to-day business activities. Risk Appetite is supported by Risk Approval Authorities 
delegated by the Board to senior management which provide thresholds for escalation of exposures and transactions to the Risk 
Committee of the Board for review and approval. The allocation of Risk Appetite and Board Delegated Authorities may be 
supported by the establishment of management delegated authorities and/or risk limits. These authorities and limits are used to 
implement risk management strategies to diversify risks, reduce unexpected losses and/or promote stability of earnings, govern 
on-going operations and monitor utilization of risk limits. Excesses to Management Delegated Authorities and risk limits can act 
as early warning indicators for Risk Appetite constraints and Board Delegated Authorities thus allowing for timely management 
attention. Senior management can delegate some or all of their authorities onwards to others in the organization. The delegated 
authorities enable the approval of single name, geographic and industry sectors, and product and portfolio exposures within 
defined parameters and limits. They are also used to manage concentration risk, establish underwriting and inventory limits for 
trading and investment banking activities and set market risk tolerances. 

Risk review and approval processes 
Risk review and approval processes provide an important control mechanism and are established by GRM based on the nature, 
size and complexity of the risk involved. In general, the risk review and approval process involves a formal review and approval 
by an individual, group or committee that is independent from the originator. The approval responsibilities are governed by the 
Enterprise Risk Appetite Framework and delegated authorities and risk limits are based on the following categories: transactions, 
projects and initiatives, and new products and services. 

Risk monitoring and reporting 
Enterprise and business segment level risk monitoring and internal reporting are critical components of our enterprise risk 
management program and support the ability of senior management and the Board to effectively perform their risk management 
and oversight responsibilities. In addition, we publish a number of external reports on risk matters to comply with regulatory 
requirements. The Risk Committee of the Board receives a CRO report at each meeting that has been reviewed by senior 
management, and which includes, among others, top and emerging risks, industry trends or other notable items. On a quarterly 
basis, we provide our Enterprise Risk Report to senior management and the Risk Committee of the Board which includes, among 
others, top and emerging risks, risk profile relative to our risk appetite, portfolio quality metrics and a range of risks we face 
along with an analysis of the related issues, key trends and, when required, management actions. On an annual basis, we provide 
a benchmarking review to the Board which compares our performance to peers across a variety of risk metrics and includes a 
composite risk scorecard which provides an objective measure of our ranking relative to the peer group. In addition to our 
regular risk monitoring, other risk-specific presentations are provided to, and discussed with, senior management and the Board 
on top and emerging risks or changes in our risk profile. 

The shaded text along with the tables specifically marked with an asterisk (*) in the following sections of the MD&A represent  
our disclosures on credit, market and liquidity and funding risks in accordance with IFRS 7, Financial Instruments: Disclosures,  
and include discussion on how we measure our risks and the objectives, policies and methodologies for managing these risks.  
Therefore, these shaded text and marked tables represent an integral part of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial  
Statements.  

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

65 

Transactional/positional risk drivers  

Credit risk  

Credit risk is the risk of loss associated with an obligor’s potential inability or unwillingness to fulfill its contractual obligations 
on a timely basis and may arise directly from the risk of default of a primary obligor (e.g., issuer, debtor, counterparty, 
borrower or policyholder), indirectly from a secondary obligor (e.g., guarantor or reinsurer), through off-balance sheet 
exposures, contingent credit risk, associated credit risk and/or transactional risk. Credit risk includes counterparty credit risk 
arising from both trading and non-trading activities. 

The responsibility for managing credit risk is shared broadly following the three lines of defence governance model. The 
allocation of the Board approved credit risk appetite is supported by the establishment of risk approval authorities and risk 
limits, delegated by the Board to the President & CEO and CRO. Credit transactions in excess of these authorities must be 
approved by the Risk Committee of the Board. To facilitate day-to-day business activities, the CRO has been empowered to 
further delegate credit risk approval authorities to individuals within GRM, the business segments, and functional units as 
necessary. 

Ensuring credit quality is not compromised for growth; 

We balance our risk and return by setting the following objectives for the management of credit risk: 
(cid:129)
(cid:129) Mitigating credit risk in transactions, relationships and portfolios; 
Avoiding excessive concentrations in correlated credit risks; 
(cid:129)
Using our credit risk rating and scoring systems or other approved credit risk assessment or rating methodologies, 
(cid:129)
policies and tools; 
Pricing appropriately for the credit risk taken; 
Detecting and preventing inappropriate credit risk through effective systems and controls; 
Applying consistent credit risk exposure measurements; 
Ongoing credit risk monitoring and administration; 
Transferring credit risk to third parties where appropriate through approved credit risk mitigation techniques (e.g., sale, 
hedging, insurance, securitization); and 
Avoiding activities that are inconsistent with our values, Code of Conduct or policies. 

(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)

(cid:129)

The Enterprise Credit Risk Management Framework (ECRMF) describes the principles, methodologies, systems, roles and 
responsibilities, reports and controls that exist for managing credit risk within the enterprise. Additional supporting policies 
exist that are designed to provide further clarification of roles and responsibilities, acceptable practices, limits and key 
controls within the enterprise. 

Credit risk measurement 
We quantify credit risk at both the individual obligor and portfolio levels to manage expected credit losses and minimize 
unexpected losses to limit earnings volatility and ensure we are adequately capitalized. 

We employ a variety of risk measurement methodologies to measure and quantify credit risk for our wholesale and retail 

credit portfolios. The wholesale portfolio is comprised of businesses, sovereigns, public sector entities, banks and other 
financial institutions, as well as certain HNW individuals. The retail portfolio is comprised of residential mortgages, personal 
loans, credit cards, and small business loans. Our credit risk rating systems are designed to assess and quantify the risk 
inherent in credit activities in an accurate and consistent manner. The resulting ratings and scores are then used for both 
client- and transaction-level risk decision-making and as key inputs for our risk measurement and capital calculations. 

Measurement of economic and regulatory capital 
Economic capital, which is our internal quantification of risks, is used for limit setting. It is also used for internal capital 
adequacy and allocation of capital to the Insurance segment. Our methodology for allocating capital to our business 
segments, other than Insurance, is based on regulatory requirements. For further details, refer to the Capital management 
section. 

In measuring credit risk to determine regulatory capital, two principal approaches are available: Internal Ratings Based 

(IRB) Approach and Standardized Approach. 

The Standardized Approach applies primarily to our Caribbean banking operations and City National and is based on risk 

weights prescribed by OSFI that are used to calculate RWA for credit risk exposure. 

The IRB Approach, which applies to most of our credit risk exposures, utilizes three key parameters which form the basis of 
our credit risk measures for both regulatory and economic capital. 
(cid:129)

Probability of default (PD): An estimated percentage that represents the likelihood of default within a given time period of 
an obligor for a specific rating grade or for a particular pool of exposure. 
Exposure at default (EAD): An amount expected to be owed by an obligor at the time of default. 
Loss given default (LGD): An estimated percentage of EAD that is not expected to be recovered during the collections and 
recovery process. 
These parameters are determined based primarily on historical experience from internal credit risk rating systems in 

(cid:129)
(cid:129)

accordance with supervisory standards. 

Each credit facility is assigned an LGD rate that is largely driven by factors that impact the extent of losses anticipated in 

the event the obligor defaults. These factors mainly include seniority of debt, collateral and the industry sector in which the 
obligor operates. Estimated LGD rates draw primarily on internal loss experiences. Where we have limited internal loss data, 
we also refer to appropriate external data to supplement the estimation process. LGD rates are estimated to reflect 
conditions that might be expected to prevail in a period of an economic downturn, with additional conservatism added to 
reflect data limitations and statistical uncertainties identified in the estimation process. 

66

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

EAD is estimated based on the current exposure to the obligor and the possible future changes in that exposure driven by 

factors such as the nature of the credit commitment. As with LGD, rates are estimated to reflect an economic downturn, with 
added conservatism to reflect data and statistical uncertainties identified in the modelling process. 

Estimates of PD, LGD and EAD are reviewed, and then validated and back-tested by an independent validation team 
within the bank, on an annual basis. In addition, quarterly monitoring and back-testing is performed by the estimation team. 
These ratings and risk measurements are used to determine our expected losses as well as economic and regulatory capital, 
setting of risk limits, portfolio management and product pricing. 

Financial and regulatory measurement distinctions 
Expected loss models are used for both regulatory capital and accounting purposes. Under both models, expected losses are 
calculated as the product of PD, LGD and EAD. However, there are certain key differences under current Basel and IFRS 
reporting frameworks which could lead to significantly different expected loss estimates, including: 
(cid:129)

Basel PDs are based on long-run averages over an entire economic cycle. IFRS PDs are based on current conditions, 
adjusted for estimates of future conditions that will impact PD under probability-weighted macroeconomic scenarios. 
Basel PDs consider the probability of default over the next 12 months. IFRS PDs consider the probability of default over 
the next 12 months only for instruments in stage 1. Expected credit losses for instruments in stage 2 are calculated using 
lifetime PDs. 
Basel LGDs are based on severe but plausible downturn economic conditions. IFRS LGDs are based on current conditions, 
adjusted for estimates of future conditions that will impact LGD under probability-weighted macroeconomic scenarios. 
For further details, refer to the Critical accounting policies and estimates section. 

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

Gross credit risk exposure 
Gross credit risk is categorized as i) lending-related and other credit risk or ii) trading-related credit risk; and is calculated 
based on the Basel III framework. Under this method, EAD for all lending-related and other credit transactions and trading-
related repo-style transactions is calculated before taking into account any collateral and is inclusive of an estimate of 
potential future changes to that credit exposure. EAD for derivatives is calculated inclusive of collateral in accordance with 
regulatory guidelines. 

Lending-related and other credit risk includes: 
(cid:129)

Loans and acceptances outstanding, undrawn commitments, and other exposures, including contingent liabilities such as 
letters of credit and guarantees, debt securities carried at FVOCI or amortized cost and deposits with financial 
institutions. Undrawn commitments represent an estimate of the contractual amount that may be drawn upon at the time 
of default of an obligor. 

Trading-related credit risk includes: 
(cid:129)

Repo-style transactions, which include repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements and securities lending and 
borrowing transactions. For repo-style transactions, gross exposure represents the amount at which securities were 
initially financed, before taking collateral into account. 
Derivative amounts which represent the credit equivalent amount, as defined by OSFI as the replacement cost plus an 
add-on amount for potential future credit exposure, scaled by a regulatory factor. For further details on replacement cost 
and credit equivalent amounts, refer to Note 9 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

(cid:129)

Credit risk assessment 
Wholesale credit risk 
The wholesale credit risk rating system is designed to measure the credit risk inherent in our wholesale credit activities. 

Each obligor is assigned a borrower risk rating (BRR), reflecting an assessment of the credit quality of the obligor. Each 

BRR has a PD calibrated against it. The BRR differentiates the riskiness of an obligor and represents our evaluation of the 
obligor’s ability and willingness to meet its contractual obligations on time over a three year time horizon. The assignment of 
BRRs is based on the evaluation of the obligor’s business risk and financial risk through fundamental credit analysis, as well 
as data-driven modelling. The determination of the PD associated with each BRR relies primarily on internal default history 
since 2006. PD estimates are designed to be a long-run average of our experience across the economic cycle in accordance 
with regulatory guidelines. 

Our rating system is designed to stratify obligors into 22 grades. The following table aligns the relative rankings of our 

22-grade internal risk ratings with the external ratings used by S&P and Moody’s. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

67 

Internal ratings map*  

Table 41   

Ratings   Business and Bank  

Sovereign  

BRR   S&P   Moody’s  

Description  

PD Bands  

  

  

  

  

0.0000% – 0.0300%   0.0000% – 0.0150%  
0.0000% – 0.0300%   0.0151% – 0.0250%  
0.0000% – 0.0350%   0.0251% – 0.0350%  

1+  
1H  
1M  

AAA  
AA+  
AA  

0.0351% – 0.0450%  
0.0451% – 0.0550%  
0.0551% – 0.0650%  
0.0651% – 0.0750%  
0.0751% – 0.0850%  
0.0851% – 0.1000%  
0.1001% – 0.1770%  

0.1771% – 0.3705%  
0.3706% – 0.7065%  
0.7066% – 1.1600%  
1.1601% – 1.6810%  
1.6811% – 2.3490%  
2.3491% – 4.4040%  
4.4041% – 7.0010%  
7.0011% – 13.1760%  
13.1761% – 24.9670%  
24.9671% – 99.9990%  

100%  
100%  

Aaa  
Aa1  
Aa2  

Aa3  
A1  
A2  
A3  
Baa1  
Baa2  
Baa3  

Ba1  
Ba2  
Ba3  
B1  
B2  
B3  
Caa1  
Caa2  
Caa3  
Ca  

C  
C  

AA-  
A+  
A  
A-  

1L  
2+H  
2+M  
2+L  
2H   BBB+  
BBB  
2M  
BBB-  
2L  

BB+  
BB  
BB-  
B+  
B  
B-  

2-H  
2-M  
2-L  
3+H  
3+M  
3+L  
3H   CCC+  
CCC  
3M  
CCC-  
3L  
CC  
4  

5  
6  

D  
D  

Investment Grade  

Non-investment  
Grade  

Impaired  

  

1  
2  
3  

4  
5  
6  
7  
8  
9  
10  

11  
12  
13  
14  
15  
16  
17  
18  
19  
20  

21  
22  

* 

This table represents an integral part of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Counterparty credit risk 
Counterparty credit risk is the risk that a party with whom the bank has entered into a financial or non-financial contract will fail 
to fulfill its contractual agreement and default on its obligation. It incorporates not only the contract’s current value, but also 
considers how that value can move as market conditions change. Counterparty credit risk usually arises from trading-related 
derivative and repo-style transactions. Derivative transactions include forwards, futures, swaps and options, and can have 
underlying references that are either financial (e.g., interest rate, foreign exchange, credit, or equity) or non-financial (e.g., 
precious metal and commodities). For further details on our derivative instruments and credit risk mitigation, refer to Note 9 of 
our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Trading counterparty credit activities are undertaken in a manner consistent with the relevant requirements under the 

ECRMF and the Enterprise Market Risk Management Framework (EMRMF), in line with our credit risk management policy 
documents and with approval in accordance with the appropriate delegated authorities. 

The primary risk mitigation techniques for trading counterparty credit risk are close-out netting and collateralization. 
Close-out netting considers the net value of contractual obligations between counterparties in a default situation, thereby 
reducing overall credit exposure. Collateralization is when a borrower pledges assets as security, which provides recourse to the 
lender in the event of default. The policies that we maintain in relation to the recognition of risk mitigation from these techniques 
incorporate such considerations as: 
(cid:129)

The use of standardized agreements such as the International Swaps and Derivatives Association Master Agreement and 
Credit Support Annex; 
Restricting eligible collateral to high quality liquid assets, primarily cash and highly-rated government securities, subject to 
appropriate haircuts; and 
The use of initial margin and variation margin arrangements in accordance with regulatory requirements and internal risk 
standards. 
Similarly, for securities finance and repurchase trading activity we mitigate counterparty credit risk via the use of 
standardized securities finance agreements, and by taking collateral generally in the form of eligible liquid securities. 

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

We also mitigate counterparty credit risk through the use of central counterparties (CCPs). These highly-regulated entities 

intermediate trades between participating bilateral counterparties and mitigate credit risk through the use of initial and 
variation margin and the ability to net offsetting trades amongst participants. The specific structure and capitalization, including 
contingent capital arrangements, of individual CCPs are analyzed as part of assigning an internal counterparty credit risk rating 
and determining appropriate counterparty credit risk limits. 

68

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Wrong-way risk 
Wrong-way risk is the risk that exposure to a counterparty is adversely correlated with the credit quality of that counterparty. 
There are two types of wrong-way risk: 
(cid:129)

Specific wrong-way risk, which exists when our exposure to a particular counterparty is positively correlated with the PD of 
the counterparty due to the nature of our transactions with them (e.g., loans collateralized by shares or debt issued by the 
counterparty or a related party). Specific wrong-way risk over-the-counter (OTC) derivative trades are done on an exception 
basis only, and are permitted only when explicitly pre-approved by GRM. Factors considered in reviewing such trades include 
the credit quality of the counterparty, the nature of the asset(s) underlying the derivative and the existence of credit 
mitigation. 
General wrong-way risk, which exists when there is a positive correlation between the PD of the counterparties and general 
macroeconomic or market factors. This typically occurs with derivatives (e.g., the size of the exposure increases) or with 
collateralized transactions (e.g., the value of the collateral declines). We monitor general wrong-way counterparty credit risk 
using a variety of metrics including stress scenarios, investment strategy concentration, the ability of counterparties to 
generate cash and liquidity, liquidity of the collateral and terms of financing. 

(cid:129)

Retail credit risk 
Credit scoring is the primary risk rating system for assessing obligor and transaction risk for retail exposures. Scoring models 
use internal and external data to assess and score borrowers, predict future performance and manage limits for existing loans 
and collection activities. Credit scores are one of the factors employed in the acquisition of new clients and management of 
existing clients. The credit score of the borrower is used to assess the predicted credit risk for each independent acquisition 
or account management action, leading to an automated decision or guidance for an adjudicator. Credit scoring improves 
credit decision quality, adjudication timeframes and consistency in the credit decision process and facilitates risk-based 
pricing. Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we adapted our retail credit risk methodology by enhancing our product 
level credit strategies with advanced analytics and portfolio monitoring. 

To arrive at a retail risk rating, borrower scores are categorized and associated with PDs for further grouping into risk 

rating categories. The following table maps PD bands to various summarized risk levels for retail exposures: 

Internal ratings map*  

Table 42   

PD bands  

0.030% – 3.844%  

3.845% – 6.786%  

6.787% – 99.99%  

100%  

Description  

Low risk  

Medium risk  

High risk  

Impaired/Default  

* 

This table represents an integral part of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Credit risk mitigation 

We seek to reduce our exposure to credit risk through a variety of means, including the structuring of transactions and the  
use of collateral.  

  

Structuring of transactions  
Specific credit policies and procedures set out the requirements for structuring transactions. Risk mitigants include the use  
of guarantees, collateral, seniority, LTV requirements and covenants. Product-specific guidelines set out appropriate  
product structuring as well as client and guarantor criteria.  

Collateral  
When we advance credit, we often require obligors to pledge collateral as security. The extent of risk mitigation provided by  
collateral depends on the amount, type and quality of the collateral taken. Specific requirements relating to collateral  
valuation and management are set out in our credit risk management policies.  

The types of collateral used to secure credit or trading facilities within the bank are varied. For example, our securities  

financing and collateralized OTC derivatives activities are primarily secured by cash and highly-rated liquid government and  
agency securities. Wholesale lending to business clients is often secured by pledges of the assets of the business, such as  
accounts receivable, inventory, operating assets and commercial real estate. In Canadian Banking and Wealth Management,  
collateral typically consists of a pledge over a real estate property, or a portfolio of debt securities and equities trading on a  
recognized exchange.  
(cid:129) We employ a risk-based approach to property valuation. Property valuation methods include automated valuation  
models (AVM) and appraisals. An AVM is a tool that estimates the value of a property by reference to market data  
including sales of comparable properties and price trends specific to the Metropolitan Statistical Area in which the  
property being valued is located. Using a risk-based approach, we also employ appraisals which can include drive-by or  
full on-site appraisals.  

(cid:129) We continue to actively manage our entire mortgage portfolio and perform stress testing, based on a combination of  

  

increasing unemployment, rising interest rates and a downturn in real estate markets.  

(cid:129) We are compliant with regulatory requirements that govern residential mortgage underwriting practices, including LTV  

parameters and property valuation requirements.  

There were no significant changes regarding our risk management policies on collateral or to the quality of the collateral  

held during the period.  

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

69 

  

  

  

Credit risk approval  
The Board, GE, GRC and other senior management committees work together to ensure the ECRMF and supporting policies,  
processes and procedures exist to manage credit risk and approve related credit risk limits. Reports are provided to the  
Board, the GRC, and senior executives to keep them informed of our risk profile, including significant credit risk issues, shifts  
in exposures and trending information, to ensure appropriate and timely actions can be taken where necessary. Our  
enterprise-wide credit risk policies set out the minimum requirements for the management of credit risk in a variety of  
borrower, transactional and portfolio management contexts.  

Transaction approval  
Credit transactions are governed by our RBC Enterprise Policy on Risk Limits and Risk Approval Authorities that captures the  
limits delegated to management and the credit rules policy, which outlines the minimum standards for managing credit risk  
at the individual client relationship and/or transaction level. The credit rules policy is further supported by business and/or  
product-specific policies and guidelines as appropriate. Transaction approvals are subject to delegated risk approval  
authorities. If a transaction exceeds senior management’s authorities, the approval of the Risk Committee of the Board is  
required.  

Product approval  
Proposals for credit products and services are comprehensively reviewed and approved under a risk assessment framework  
and are subject to risk approval authorities which increase as the level of risk increases. New and amended products must  
be reviewed relative to all risk drivers, including credit risk. All existing products must be reviewed following a risk-based  
assessment approach on a regular basis.  

Credit risk limits  
(cid:129)

The allocation of risk appetite and Board delegated authorities are supported by the establishment of risk limits which  
take into account both regulatory constraints and internal risk management judgment. Risk limits are established at the  
following levels: single name limits, regional, country and industrial sector limits (notional and economic capital),  
regulatory large exposure limits, product and portfolio limits, and underwriting and distribution risk limits. These limits  
apply across all businesses, portfolios, transactions and products.  

(cid:129) We actively manage credit exposures and limits to ensure alignment with our risk appetite, to maintain our target  

business mix and to ensure that there is no undue concentration risk.  
(cid:129)

Concentration risk is defined as the risk arising from large exposures that are highly correlated such that their  
ability to meet contractual obligations could be similarly affected by changes in economic, political or other risk  
drivers.  
Credit concentration limits are reviewed on a regular basis after taking into account business, economic, financial  
and regulatory environments.  

(cid:129)

Credit risk administration 
Loan forbearance 
In our overall management of borrower relationships, economic or legal reasons may necessitate forbearance to certain clients 
with respect to the original terms and conditions of their loans. We have specialized groups and formalized policies that direct 
the management of high risk, delinquent or defaulted borrowers. We strive to identify borrowers in financial difficulty early and 
modify their loan terms to minimize losses and assist clients in need. A forbearance agreement may be entered into with the 
borrower where we will forbear from enforcing on security in exchange for concessions made by the borrower. In these 
circumstances, a borrower may be granted concessions that would not otherwise be considered. Examples of such concessions 
to retail borrowers may include rate reduction, payment deferral and term extensions. Concessions to wholesale borrowers may 
include payment deferral, restructuring the agreements, modifying the original terms of the agreement and/or relaxation of 
covenants. For both retail and wholesale loans, the appropriate remediation techniques are based on the individual borrower’s 
situation, our policy and the client’s willingness and capacity to meet the new arrangement. 

70

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Credit risk exposure by portfolio, sector and geography 
The following table presents our credit risk exposures under the Basel regulatory defined classes and reflects EAD. The 
classification of our sectors aligns with our view of credit risk by industry. 

Credit risk exposure by portfolio, sector and geography  

Table 43   

October 31  
2022  

As at  

Credit risk (1), (2)  

   Counterparty credit risk (5)  

     

Credit risk (1), (2)  

  Counterparty credit risk (5)  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Undrawn  

Other (4)  

  

transactions   Derivatives  

Undrawn   Other (4)  

  

transactions   Derivatives  

  

  

  

  

Retail  

Total  
exposure  

  
  

On-balance  
sheet amount  

  
–   $
–  
–  

     
 500,950     $
127,423     
118,199     

362,793   $ 96,609   $

30,080  
85,362  

90,932  
19,422  

Total retail  

$

 523,890   $ 222,546   $

 136     $

–   $ 

746,572     $

478,235   $ 206,963   $

146      $

–   $

685,344  

On-balance  
sheet amount  

Off-balance sheet  
amount (3)  

Repo-style  

Residential secured (6)   $
Qualifying revolving (7)  
Other retail  

 393,346   $ 107,604   $

32,474  
98,070  

94,949  
19,993  

  

  

    
–     $
–    
136    

  
–   $
–  
–  

–   $

  

  

Wholesale   

$

Agriculture  
Automotive  
Banking (8)  
Consumer discretionary  
Consumer staples  
Oil and gas  
Financial services  
Financing products (8)  
Forest products  
Governments (8)  
Industrial products  
Information technology  
Investments  
Mining and metals  
Public works and  
infrastructure  

Real estate and related  
Other services  
Telecommunication  

and media  
Transportation  
Utilities  
Other sectors  

 10,417   $
8,919  
73,335  
19,666  
7,103  
6,086  
45,394  
5,762  
1,143  
279,401  
10,755  
5,291  
23,764  
2,377  

2,614  
89,926  
27,839  

7,301  
6,394  
12,318  
4,113  

2,089   $
9,184  
5,487  
9,297  
6,750  
11,272  
25,017  
2,352  
1,033  
5,678  
9,319  
7,144  
3,946  
4,259  

2,417  
18,295  
13,425  

8,298  
6,386  
20,651  
1,700  

    
 36     $
317    
1,036    
569    
346    
1,923    
3,530    
163    
230    
1,563    
601    
298    
669    
945    

  
–   $
–  
111,559  
–  
–  
–  
69,790  
237  
–  
18,745  
–   
55  
157  
–  

  

 161   $

1,606  
38,830  
949  
1,923  
5,959  
24,546  
780  
78  
6,290  
1,216  
1,908  
458  
467  

     
 12,703     $
20,026     
230,247     
30,481     
16,122     
25,240     
168,277     
9,294     
2,484     
311,677     
21,891     
14,696     
28,994     
8,048     

497    
1,872    
2,848    

79    
930    
5,275    
71    

–   
–   
33  

–  
–  
–  
73  

144  
818  
852  

5,672     
110,911     
44,997     

2,751  
2,069  
5,081  
20,126  

18,429     
15,779     
43,325     
26,083     

October 31  
2021  

Off-balance sheet  
amount (3)  

Repo-style  

  

  

  

  

     
–      $
–     
146     

     
30      $

9,400   $
6,288  
45,906  
14,792  
6,254  
5,678  
32,977  
7,868  
969  
287,806  
7,308  
3,591  
22,238  
993  

1,427  
76,141  
23,872  

5,294  
6,151  
9,059  
3,084  

1,756   $
9,184  
4,545  
9,380  
6,949  
10,328  
19,252  
2,405  
991  
4,794  
8,933  
5,715  
3,201  
3,730  

1,963  
14,223  
13,362  

9,748  
6,832  
17,152  
1,139  

173     
765     
573     
180     
1,474     
2,623     
485     
201     
1,533     
594     
237     
412     
952     

391     
1,568     
1,860     

598     
1,319     
4,131     
7     

  
–   $
–  
–  

–   $

  
–   $
–  
117,996  
–  
–  
–  
64,593  
388  
–  
23,536  
–  
49  
12  
–  

–  
–  
47  

–  
–  
–  
7  

  
–   $
–  
–  

  
84   $

1,124  
30,888  
698  
1,058  
7,493  
16,262  
848  
17  
5,692  
811  
5,447  
174  
237  

239  
1,176  
1,316  

1,976  
1,426  
4,464  
6,960  

Total  
exposure  

  
459,402  
121,012  
104,930  

  
11,270  
16,769  
200,100  
25,443  
14,441  
24,973  
135,707  
11,994  
2,178  
323,361  
17,646  
15,039  
26,037  
5,912  

4,020  
93,108  
40,457  

17,616  
15,728  
34,806  
11,197  

Total wholesale  

$

 649,918   $ 173,999   $ 23,798     $ 200,649   $ 117,012   $  1,165,376     $

577,096   $ 155,582   $ 20,106      $ 206,628   $ 88,390   $ 1,047,802  

Total exposure (1)  

$ 1,173,808   $ 396,545   $ 23,934     $ 200,649   $ 117,012   $  1,911,948     $ 1,055,331   $ 362,545   $ 20,252      $ 206,628   $ 88,390   $ 1,733,146  

By geography (9)  

Canada  
U.S.  
Europe  
Other International  

  

  

    

$

 697,015   $ 284,705   $  9,444     $
79,829  
334,821  
25,485  
79,343  
6,526  
62,629  

10,145    
2,603    
1,742    

  

  

     
79,795   $  41,923   $  1,112,882     $
508,822     
59,866  
182,782     
39,244  
107,462     
21,744  

24,161  
36,107  
14,821  

  

  

     

  
693,700   $ 264,708   $ 9,141      $ 88,523   $ 27,978   $ 1,084,050  
404,977  
245,929  
155,407  
62,509  
88,712  
53,193  

7,866     
1,991     
1,254     

69,295  
22,667  
5,875  

27,270  
25,757  
7,385  

54,617  
42,483  
21,005  

  

  

Total exposure (1)  

$ 1,173,808   $ 396,545   $ 23,934     $ 200,649   $ 117,012   $ 1,911,948     $ 1,055,331   $ 362,545   $ 20,252      $ 206,628   $ 88,390   $ 1,733,146  

(1) 

(2) 

Excludes securitization, banking book equities and other assets not subject to the standardized or IRB approach as well as exposures acquired through the U.S. 
government Paycheck Protection Program. 
EAD for standardized exposures are reported net of allowance for impaired assets and EAD for IRB exposures are reported gross of all ACL and partial write-offs as per 
regulatory definitions. 
EAD for undrawn credit commitments and other off-balance sheet amounts are reported after the application of credit conversion factors. 
Includes other off-balance sheet exposures such as letters of credit and guarantees. 

(3) 
(4) 
(5)  Counterparty credit risk EAD reflects exposure amounts after netting. Collateral is included in EAD for repo-style transactions to the extent allowed by regulatory 

guidelines. Exchange traded derivatives are included in Other sectors. 
Includes residential mortgages and home equity lines of credit. 
Includes credit cards, unsecured lines of credit and overdraft protection products.  

(6) 
(7) 
(8)  Comparative amounts have been reclassified from those previously presented. 
(9)  Geographic profile is based on country of residence of the borrower. 

2022 vs. 2021 
Total credit risk exposure increased $179 billion or 10% from last year, primarily due to the impact of foreign exchange 
translation, volume growth in loans and undrawn commitments in our retail and wholesale portfolios, higher derivative 
exposures and an increase in securities. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

71 

Table 44   

October 31  
2021  
  

  

  

Net International exposure by region and client type (1), (2)  

  

  

  

As at  

October 31  
2022  
  

Asset type  

Client type  

  

Loans  

Repo-style  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Outstanding   Securities (3)  

transactions   Derivatives     

Financials  

Sovereign  

Corporate  

Total     

Total  

Europe (excluding U.K.)  
U.K.  
Caribbean (4)  
Asia-Pacific  
Other (4), (5)  

$ 14,832   $  38,187   $ 1,408   $ 3,326      $ 18,746   $ 25,896   $ 13,111   $  57,753    $ 49,893  
34,075  
4,094      17,374   14,198  
20,945  
3,913  
7,605  
27,871  
1,549      11,017   19,392  
2,547  
1,833  

39,949    
19,688    
35,338    
3,043    

26,926  
10,594  
26,031  
1,990  

8,377  
8,170  
4,929  
636  

8,332  
8,524  
6,817  
596  

597  
455  
941  
390  

115     

67     

574  

Net International  
exposure (6), (7)  

$ 39,101   $ 103,728   $ 3,791   $ 9,151      $ 55,316   $ 65,232   $ 35,223   $ 155,771    $ 135,331  

(1)  Geographic profile is based on country of risk, which reflects our assessment of the geographic risk associated with a given exposure. Typically, this is the residence of 

the borrower. 
Exposures are calculated on a fair value basis and net of collateral, which includes $357 billion against repo-style transactions (October 31, 2021 – $349 billion) and 
$14 billion against derivatives (October 31, 2021 – $11 billion). 
Securities include $13 billion of trading securities (October 31, 2021 – $22 billion), $56 billion of deposits (October 31, 2021 – $34 billion), and $35 billion of investment 
securities (October 31, 2021 – $33 billion). 
Exposures to Latin America, previously reported with Caribbean exposures, are now presented in Other. Comparative period amounts have been reclassified to conform 
to this presentation. 
Includes exposures in the Middle East, Africa, and Latin America. 
Excludes $5,213 million (October 31, 2021 – $3,076 million) of exposures to supranational agencies. 
Reflects $2,233 million of mitigation through credit default swaps, which are largely used to hedge single name exposures and market risk (October 31, 2021 – $1,499 million). 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 
(6) 
(7) 

72

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Residential mortgages and home equity lines of credit (insured vs. uninsured) (1) 
Residential mortgages and home equity lines of credit are secured by residential properties. The following table presents a 
breakdown by geographic region. 

Residential mortgages and home equity lines of credit  

Table 45   

(Millions of Canadian dollars,  
except percentage amounts)  

Region (4)  
Canada  

Atlantic provinces  
Quebec  
Ontario  
Alberta  
Saskatchewan and  

Manitoba  

B.C. and territories  

Total Canada (5)  
U.S.  
Other International  

Total International  

Total  

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars,  
except percentage amounts)  

Region (4)  
Canada  

Atlantic provinces  
Quebec  
Ontario  
Alberta  
Saskatchewan and  

Manitoba  

B.C. and territories  

Total Canada (5)  
U.S.  
Other International  

Total International  

As at October 31, 2022  

Residential mortgages  

Home equity  
lines of credit (3)  

  

Insured (2)  

  

Uninsured  

  

Total    

Total  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  
  

  
    
$  8,460   46%     $  10,052   54%     $  18,512    
43,067    
188,109    
41,817    

30,623   71  
156,700   83  
22,154   53  

12,444   29  
31,409   17  
19,663   47  

  
  
  

  
  
  

  
  

  

  

  

  

  
$  1,659  
3,300  
17,009  
4,923  

8,847   43  
12,290   17  

93,113   24  
–   –  
–   –  

11,808   57  
59,347   83  

290,684   76  
31,956   100  
3,043   100  

20,655    
71,637    

383,797    
31,956    
3,043    

–   –  

34,999   100  

34,999    

1,940  
7,386  

36,217  
1,776  
1,621  

3,397  

$ 93,113   22%     $ 325,683   78%     $ 418,796    

$ 39,614  

  

  

  

  

  

  

As at October 31, 2021  

Residential mortgages  

Insured (2)  

  

Uninsured  

  

$

  

  

  

  

8,407   48%     $

  

  

  
  

  

  

52%     $
68  
80  
50  

  
  
  

  
8,944  
27,567  
135,767  
20,821  

10,714  
51,823  

54  
80  

255,636  

72  
23,422   100  
2,740   100  

12,742   32  
34,211   20  
20,680   50  

9,179   46  
13,314   20  

98,533   28  
1   –  
–   –  

  

  

Total    

  
    
17,351    
40,309    
169,978    
41,501    

19,893    
65,137    

354,169    
23,423    
2,740    

26,163    

Home equity  
lines of credit (3)  

Total  

  

$

  
1,602  
3,135  
15,891  
5,343  

1,970  
7,383  

35,324  
1,413  
1,518  

2,931  

  
  

  
  
  

  

  

  
  

  
  
  

  

  
  

  
  
  

  

  

  
  

  
  
  

  
  

  
  
  

  

1   –  

26,162   100  

Total  

$ 98,534   26%     $ 281,798  

74%     $ 380,332    

$

38,255  

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(5) 

Disclosure is provided in accordance with the requirements of OSFI’s Guideline B-20 (Residential Mortgage Underwriting Practices and 
Procedures). 
Insured residential mortgages are mortgages whereby our exposure to default is mitigated by insurance through the Canadian 
Mortgage and Housing Corporation or other private mortgage default insurers. 
Includes $39,591 million and $23 million of uninsured and insured home equity lines of credit, respectively (October 31, 2021 – 
$38,228 million and $27 million, respectively), reported within the personal loan category. The amounts in the U.S. and Other 
International include term loans collateralized by residential mortgages. 

(4)  Region is based upon the address of the property mortgaged. The Atlantic provinces are comprised of Newfoundland and Labrador, 

Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, and B.C. and territories are comprised of British Columbia, Nunavut, Northwest 
Territories and Yukon. 
Total consolidated residential mortgages in Canada of $384 billion (October 31, 2021 – $354 billion) includes $12 billion (October 31, 
2021 – $11 billion) of mortgages with commercial clients in Canadian Banking, of which $9 billion (October 31, 2021 – $8 billion) are 
insured mortgages, and $17 billion (October 31, 2021 – $19 billion) of residential mortgages in Capital Markets, of which $17 billion 
(October 31, 2021 – $18 billion) are held for securitization purposes. All of the residential mortgages held for securitization purposes are 
insured (October 31, 2021 – all insured). 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

73 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Residential mortgages portfolio by amortization period (1) 
The following table provides a summary of the percentage of residential mortgages that fall within the remaining amortization 
periods based upon current customer payment amounts, which incorporate payments larger than the minimum contractual 
amount and/or higher frequency of payments. 

Residential mortgages portfolio by amortization period  

Table 46   

October 31  
2022  

As at  

  

Canada  

U.S. and other  
International  

October 31  
2021  

U.S. and other  
International  

Total      Canada  
  
75%  
25   
–   
–   

     
54%     
21      
2      
23      

  
25%  
75   
–   
–   

Total  

  
71%  
28   
1   
–   

  
27%  
71   
2   
–   

Amortization period  

≤ 25 years  
> 25 years ≤ 30 years  
> 30 years ≤ 35 years  
> 35 years  

  
57%  
16   
2   
25   

Total  

100%  

100%   100%     

100%  

100%   100%  

(1) 

Disclosure is provided in accordance with the requirements of OSFI’s Guideline B-20 (Residential Mortgage Underwriting Practices and 
Procedures). 

Average LTV ratios (1) 
The following table provides a summary of our average LTV ratios for newly originated and acquired uninsured residential 
mortgages and RBC Homeline Plan® products by geographic region, as well as the respective LTV ratios for our total Canadian 
Banking residential mortgage portfolio outstanding. 

Average LTV ratios  

Table 47   

For the year ended  

October 31  
2022  
Uninsured  

October 31  
2021  
Uninsured  

Residential  
mortgages (2)  

RBC Homeline  
Plan® products (3)  

Residential  
mortgages (2)  

RBC Homeline  
Plan® products (3)  

  

  

  

  

  
73%    
72     
66     
73     
75     
66     
    
    

n.m.
n.m.

  
74%  
72   
71   
73   
74   
69   
74   
73   

  
75%  
74   
68   
72   
75   
67   
  
  

n.m.
n.m.

Average of newly originated  

and acquired for the period,  
by region (4)  
Atlantic provinces  
Quebec  
Ontario  
Alberta  
Saskatchewan and Manitoba  
B.C. and territories  
U.S.  
Other International  

Average of newly originated  

and acquired for the  
period (5), (6)  

Total Canadian Banking  
residential mortgages  
portfolio (7)  

  
72%  
72   
70   
73   
73   
68   
75   
72   

71%  

68%    

72%  

69%  

52%  

46%    

52%  

46%  

(1) 

Disclosure is provided in accordance with the requirements of OSFI’s Guideline B-20 (Residential Mortgage Underwriting Practices and 
Procedures). 

(2)  Residential mortgages exclude residential mortgages within the RBC Homeline Plan® products. 
(3)  RBC Homeline Plan® products are comprised of both residential mortgages and home equity lines of credit. 
(4)  Region is based upon address of the property mortgaged. The Atlantic provinces are comprised of Newfoundland and Labrador, Prince 
Edward Island, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, and B.C. and territories are comprised of British Columbia, Nunavut, Northwest 
Territories and Yukon. 
The average LTV ratio for newly originated and acquired uninsured residential mortgages and RBC Homeline Plan® products is calculated 
on a weighted basis by mortgage amounts at origination. 
For newly originated mortgages and RBC Homeline Plan® products, LTV is calculated based on the total facility amount for the residential 
mortgage and RBC Homeline Plan® product divided by the value of the related residential property. 

(6) 

(5) 

(7)  Weighted by mortgage balances and adjusted for property values based on the Teranet – National Bank National Composite House Price 

Index. 

n.m.  not meaningful 

74

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

  

  

Credit quality performance 
The following credit quality performance tables and analysis provide information on loans, which represents loans, acceptances 
and commitments, and other financial assets. 

Gross impaired loans (GIL)  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts)  

Personal & Commercial Banking  
Wealth Management  
Capital Markets  

Total GIL  

Impaired loans, beginning balance  

Classified as impaired during the period (new impaired) (1)  
Net repayments (1)  
Amounts written off  
Other (2)  

Impaired loans, balance at end of period  

GIL as a % of related loans and acceptances  
Total GIL as a % of related loans and acceptances  

Personal & Commercial Banking  

Canadian Banking  
Caribbean Banking  
Wealth Management  
Capital Markets  

Table 48   

As at and for the year ended  

October 31  
2022  
$ 1,362  
278  
559  

October 31  
2021  
$ 1,590  
233  
485  

$ 2,199  

$ 2,308  

$ 2,308  
1,711  
(450)  
(1,149)  
(221)  

$ 3,195  
1,726  
(721)  
(1,169)  
(723)  

$ 2,199  

$ 2,308  

  
0.26%  
0.23%  
0.18%  
3.93%  
0.25%  
0.42%  

  
0.31%  
0.30%  
0.24%  
4.65%  
0.26%  
0.45%  

(1) 

(2) 

Certain GIL movements for Canadian Banking retail and wholesale portfolios are generally allocated to new impaired, as 
Net repayments and certain Other movements are not reasonably determinable. Certain GIL movements for Caribbean 
Banking retail and wholesale portfolios are generally allocated to Net repayments and new impaired, as Net repayments 
and certain Other movements are not reasonably determinable. 
Includes return to performing status during the period, recoveries of loans and advances previously written off, sold, and 
foreign exchange translation and other movements. 

2022 vs. 2021 
Total GIL of $2,199 million decreased $109 million or 5% from last year and the total GIL ratio of 26 bps decreased 5 bps, due to 
lower impaired loans in Personal & Commercial Banking, partially offset by higher impaired loans in Capital Markets and Wealth 
Management. 

GIL in Personal & Commercial Banking decreased $228 million or 14%, mainly due to lower impaired loans in our Canadian 

Banking commercial portfolios, largely in the real estate and related and other services sectors. Lower impaired loans in our 
Canadian Banking residential mortgages portfolios also contributed to the decrease. 

GIL in Wealth Management increased $45 million or 19%, largely due to higher impaired loans in U.S. Wealth Management 

(including City National), mainly in the consumer discretionary sector, partially offset by repayments in International Wealth 
Management in the investment sector. 

GIL in Capital Markets increased $74 million or 15%, largely due to higher impaired loans in the real estate and related and 

consumer staples sectors, partially offset by lower impaired loans in a few sectors, including the transportation sector. 

Allowance for credit losses  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Personal & Commercial Banking  
Wealth Management  
Capital Markets  
Corporate Support and other (1)  

ACL on loans  
ACL on other financial assets (2)  

ACL on loans is comprised of:  

Total ACL  

Retail  
Wholesale  

ACL on performing loans  
ACL on impaired loans  

Table 49   

As at   

October 31  
2022  

October 31  
2021  
$ 3,200   $ 3,478  
320  
620  
1  

382  
597  
2  

4,181  
33  

4,419  
52  

$ 4,214   $ 4,471  
  
$ 2,285   $ 2,287  
1,435  

1,227  

  

$ 3,512   $ 3,722  
697  

669  

(1) 
(2) 

Includes PCL recorded in Corporate Support, Insurance and Investor & Treasury Services. 
ACL on other financial assets mainly represents allowances on debt securities measured at FVOCI and amortized cost, 
accounts receivable and financial guarantees. 

2022 vs. 2021 
Total ACL of $4,214 million decreased $257 million or 6% from last year, primarily reflecting a decrease of $238 million in ACL on loans. 
ACL on performing loans of $3,512 million decreased $210 million or 6%, primarily due to lower ACL in Personal & Commercial 

Banking, reflecting the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by unfavourable changes in our macroeconomic 
outlook in the current year. 

ACL on impaired loans of $669 million decreased $28 million or 4%, due to lower ACL in Capital Markets and Personal & 

Commercial Banking, partially offset by higher ACL in Wealth Management. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

75 

Market risk  

Market risk is defined to be the impact of market prices upon our financial condition. This includes potential gains or losses  
due to changes in market determined variables such as interest rates, credit spreads, equity prices, commodity prices, foreign  
exchange rates and implied volatilities.  

The measures of financial condition impacted by market risk are as follows: 

1.  Positions whose revaluation gains and losses are reported in revenue, which includes: 
a)  Changes in the fair value of instruments classified or designated as FVTPL, and 
b)  Hedge ineffectiveness. 

2.  CET1 capital, which includes: 
a)  All of the above, plus 
b)  Changes in the fair value of FVOCI securities where revaluation gains and losses are reported as OCI, 
c)  Changes in the Canadian dollar value of investments in foreign subsidiaries, net of hedges, due to foreign exchange 

translation, and 

d)  Changes in the fair value of employee benefit plan deficits. 

3.  CET1 ratio, which includes: 

a)  All of the above, plus 
b)  Changes in RWA resulting from changes in traded market risk factors, and 
c)  Changes in the Canadian dollar value of RWA due to foreign exchange translation. 

4.  The economic value of the Bank, which includes: 

a)  Points 1 and 2 above, plus 
b)  Changes in the economic value of other non-trading positions, net interest income, and fee based income, as a 

result of changes in market risk factors. 

Market risk controls – FVTPL positions  
As an element of the ERAF, the Board approves our overall market risk constraints. GRM creates and manages the control  
structure for FVTPL positions which ensures that business is conducted on a basis consistent with Board requirements. The  
Market and Counterparty Credit Risk function within GRM is responsible for creating and managing the controls and  
governance procedures that ensure that risk taken is consistent with risk appetite constraints set by the Board. These controls  
include limits on probabilistic measures of potential loss such as Value-at-Risk, Stressed Value-at-Risk, Incremental Risk Charge  
and stress tests as defined below:  

Value-at-Risk (VaR) is a statistical measure of potential loss for a financial portfolio computed at a given level of  
confidence and over a defined holding period. We measure VaR at the 99th percentile confidence level for price movements  
over a one-day holding period using historic simulation of the last two years of equally weighted historic market data.  
These calculations are updated daily with current risk positions, with the exception of certain less material positions that  
are not actively traded and are updated on at least a monthly basis.   

Stressed Value-at-Risk (SVaR) is calculated in an identical manner as VaR with the exception that it is computed using a  
fixed historical one-year period of extreme volatility and its inverse rather than the most recent two-year history. The  
stress period used is a one-year period covering the market volatility observed during Q2 2020. SVaR is calculated daily for  
all portfolios, with the exception of certain less material positions that are not actively traded and are updated on at least  
a monthly basis.  

VaR and SVaR are statistical estimates based on historical market data and should be interpreted with knowledge of their  
limitations, which include the following:  

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

VaR and SVaR will not be predictive of future losses if the realized market movements differ significantly from the  
historical periods used to compute them.  
VaR and SVaR project potential losses over a one-day holding period and do not project potential losses for risk  
positions held over longer time periods.  
VaR and SVaR are measured using positions at close of business and do not include the impact of trading and hedging  
activity over the course of a day.  

We validate our VaR and SVaR measures through a variety of means – including subjecting the models to vetting and  
validation by a group independent of the model developers and by back-testing the VaR against daily marked-to-market  
revenue to identify and examine events in which actual outcomes in trading revenue exceed the VaR projections.  

Incremental Risk Charge (IRC) captures the risk of losses under default or rating changes for issuers of certain traded fixed  
income instruments. IRC is measured over a one year horizon at a 99.9% confidence level, and captures different liquidity  
horizons for instruments and concentrations in issuers under a constant level of risk assumption. Changes in measured risk  
levels are primarily associated with changes in inventory from the applicable fixed income trading portfolios.  

Stress tests – Our market risk stress testing program is used to identify and control risk due to large changes in market  
prices and rates. We conduct stress testing daily on positions that are marked-to-market. The stress tests simulate both  
historical and hypothetical events which are severe and long-term in duration. Historical scenarios are taken from actual  
market events and range in duration up to 90 days. Examples include the COVID-19 Pandemic of 2020, Global Financial Crisis  
of 2008 and the Taper Tantrum of 2013. Hypothetical scenarios are designed to be forward-looking at potential future market  
stresses, and are designed to be severe but plausible. We are constantly evaluating and refining these scenarios as market  
conditions change. Stress results are calculated assuming an instantaneous revaluation of our positions with no  
management action.  

76

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

These measures are computed on all positions that are FVTPL for financial reporting purposes, with the exception of those in a 
designated hedging relationship and those in our insurance businesses. 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

As at  

Average  

High  

Low  

As at  

Average  

High  

Market risk measures – FVTPL positions 

Market risk measures*  

  

  

Equity  
Foreign exchange  
Commodities  
Interest rate (1)  
Credit specific (2)  
Diversification (3)  

Market risk VaR (4)  

October 31, 2022  

October 31, 2021  

  

For the year ended  

  

For the year ended  

$

$ 

$

45   $
3  
6  
47  
5  
(47)  

34   $
4  
5  
34  
7  
(31)  

51   $
7  
6  
62  
10  
n.m.  

24   $
4  
3  
61  
9  
(51)  

20   $
4  
3  
44  
8  
(35)  

38   $
6  
4  
64  
11  
n.m.  

59   $

53   $

87   $

50   $

44   $

72   $

21   $
1  
3  
17  
4  
n.m.  

34   $

47   $

Table 50   

Low  

12  
2  
2  
21  
6  
n.m.  

23  

29  

Market risk Stressed VaR (4)  

192   $

103   $

226   $

59   $

53   $ 101   $

This table represents an integral part of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

* 
(1)  General credit spread risk and funding spread risk associated with uncollateralized derivatives are included under interest rate VaR. 
(2)  Credit specific risk captures issuer-specific credit spread volatility. 
(3)  Market risk VaR is less than the sum of the individual risk factor VaR results due to risk factor diversification. 
(4) 

The average market risk VaR and average SVaR for the year ended October 31, 2022 includes $11 million and $36 million, respectively (October 31, 2021 – $13 million and 
$15 million), related to loan underwriting commitments. 

n.m.  not meaningful 

2022 vs. 2021 
Average market risk VaR of $53 million increased $9 million from last year. This was driven by the impact of heightened market 
volatility this year on our equity derivatives portfolio, partially offset by the impact of the Q2 2020 period of significant market 
volatility no longer being reflected in our two-year historical VaR period. 

Average SVaR of $103 million increased $50 million, largely driven by unfavourable market conditions this year which 

impacted loan underwriting commitments, and increased exposures in our fixed income portfolios. 

The following chart displays a bar graph of our daily trading profit and loss and a line graph of our daily market risk VaR. We 
incurred 4 days of net trading losses in 2022. 

Trading revenue (teb), (1) (2) and VaR  (Millions of Canadian dollars)

80

60

40

20

0

-20

-40

-60

-80

-100

2 1

0

v  1,  2

o

N

2

2

0

n   3 1,  2

J a

2

2

0

0 ,  2

r  3

p

A

2

2

0

J u l  3 1,  2

Trading Revenue (teb) (1) (2)

VaR

2

2

0

c t  3 1,  2

O

 

(1) 
(2) 

Trading revenue (teb) amounts in the chart above have been revised from those previously presented.  
Trading revenue (teb) amounts in the chart above exclude the impact of loan underwriting commitments. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

77 

The following chart displays the distribution of daily trading profit and loss in 2022 and 2021 with 4 days of net trading losses in 
2022 as mentioned above and no net trading losses in 2021. The largest reported profit was $54 million with an average daily 
profit of $16 million. 

Trading revenue (teb), (1) (2)

s
y
a
D

 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N
n

 

i
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

0
6
-

5
5
-

0
5
-

5
4
-

0
4
-

5
3
-

0
3
-

5
2
-

0
2
-

5
1
-

0
1
-

5
-

0 5

0
1

5
1

0
2

5
2

0
3

5
3

0
4

5
4

0
5

5
5

0
6

Daily net trading revenue (C$ millions), excluding structured entities

2022

2021

 

(1) 
(2) 

Amounts have been revised from those previously presented. 
Trading revenue (teb) amounts in the chart above exclude the impact of loan underwriting commitments. 

Market risk measures for assets and liabilities of RBC Insurance® 
We offer a range of insurance products to clients and hold investments to meet the future obligations to policyholders. The 
investments which support actuarial liabilities are predominantly fixed income assets designated as FVTPL. Consequently, 
changes in the fair values of these assets are recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Income and are largely offset by 
changes in the fair value of the actuarial liabilities, the impact of which is reflected in PBCAE. As at October 31, 2022, we held 
assets in support of approximately $12 billion of liabilities with respect to insurance obligations (October 31, 2021 – $13 billion). 

Market risk controls – Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book (IRRBB) positions1  
IRRBB arises primarily from traditional customer-originated banking products such as deposits and loans, and includes  
related hedges and interest rate risk from securities held for liquidity management purposes. Factors contributing to IRRBB  
include mismatches between asset and liability repricing dates, relative changes in asset and liability rates in response to  
market rate scenarios, and other product features affecting the expected timing of cash flows, such as options to pre-pay  
loans or redeem term deposits prior to contractual maturity. IRRBB sensitivities are regularly measured and reported, and  
subject to limits and controls with independent oversight from GRM.  

The Board approves the risk appetite for IRRBB, and the Asset-Liability Committee (ALCO) and GRM provide ongoing  
governance through IRRBB risk policies, limits, operating standards and other controls. IRRBB reports are reviewed regularly  
by GRM, ALCO, the GRC, the Risk Committee of the Board and the Board.  

IRRBB measurement  
To monitor and control IRRBB, we assess two primary metrics, Net Interest Income (NII) risk and Economic Value of Equity  
(EVE) risk, under a range of market shocks, scenarios, and time horizons. Market scenarios include currency-specific parallel  
and non-parallel yield curve changes, interest rate volatility shocks, and interest rate scenarios prescribed by regulators.  
In measuring NII risk, detailed banking book balance sheets and income statements are dynamically simulated to  
estimate the impact of market stress scenarios on projected NII. Assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet positions are  
simulated over various time horizons. The simulations incorporate maturities, renewals, and new originations along with  
prepayment and redemption behaviour. Product pricing and volumes are forecasted based on past experience to determine  
response expectations for a given market shock scenario. EVE risk captures the market value sensitivity to changes in rates. In  
measuring EVE risk, deterministic (single-scenario) and stochastic (multiple-scenario) valuation techniques are applied to  
spot position data. NII and EVE risks are measured for a range of market risk stress scenarios which include extreme but  
plausible changes in market rates and volatilities. IRRBB measures assume continuation of existing hedge strategies.  

Management of NII and EVE risk is complementary and supports our efforts to generate a sustainable high-quality NII  

stream. NII and EVE risks for specific units are measured daily, weekly or monthly depending on materiality, complexity and  
hedge strategy.  

A number of assumptions affecting cash flows, product re-pricing and the administration of rates underlie the models  
used to measure NII and EVE risk. The key assumptions pertain to the projected funding date of mortgage rate commitments,  
fixed-rate loan prepayment behaviour, term deposit redemption behaviour, and the term and rate profile of non-maturity  
deposits. All assumptions are derived empirically based on historical client behaviour and product pricing with consideration  
of possible forward-looking changes. All models and assumptions used to measure IRRBB are subject to independent  
oversight by GRM.  

Market risk measures – IRRBB Sensitivities  
The following table shows the potential before-tax impact of an immediate and sustained 100 bps increase or decrease in  
interest rates on projected 12-month NII and EVE, assuming no subsequent hedging. Rate floors are applied within the  
declining rate scenarios to prevent EVE valuation and NII simulation market rate levels from falling below a minimum average  
level of negative 25 bps across major currencies. Interest rate risk measures are based on current on and off-balance sheet  
positions which can change over time in response to business activity and management actions.  

IRRBB positions include the impact of derivatives in hedge accounting relationships and FVOCI securities used for interest rate risk management. 

1 

78

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Market risk – IRRBB measures*  

  

  

October 31  
2022  
  

EVE risk  

NII risk (1)  

Table 51   

October 31  
2021  
  

  

  
  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Before-tax impact of:  

100 bps increase in rates  
100 bps decrease in rates  

Canadian  
dollar impact  

U.S. dollar  
impact  

Canadian  
dollar impact  

U.S. dollar  
impact  

Total    

Total     

EVE risk   NII risk (1)  

  

  

    

  

$ (1,332)  $ (568)  $ (1,900)     $
440  

1,709    

1,269  

547   $
(598)  

  
234   $
(241)  

     

  

781      $ (2,009)  $
(839)    

1,537  

  
929  
(921)  

* 
(1) 

This table represents an integral part of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Represents the 12-month NII exposure to an instantaneous and sustained shift in interest rates. 

As at October 31, 2022, an immediate and sustained -100 bps shock would have had a negative impact to our NII of $839 million, 
down from $921 million last year, and an immediate and sustained +100 bps shock would have had a negative impact to our EVE 
of $1,900 million, down from $2,009 million last year. Both the year-over-year change in NII and EVE sensitivity reflect additional 
hedging activity. The impact of hedging activity on the EVE sensitivity was more than offset by the impact of a higher rate 
environment. During 2022, NII and EVE risks remained within approved limits. 

Market risk measures for other material non-trading portfolios 
Investment securities carried at FVOCI 
We held $93 billion of investment securities carried at FVOCI as at October 31, 2022, compared to $78 billion at the end of the prior 
year. We hold debt securities carried at FVOCI primarily as investments, as well as to manage liquidity risk and hedge interest 
rate risk in our non-trading banking balance sheet. As at October 31, 2022, our portfolio of investment securities carried at FVOCI 
is interest rate sensitive and would impact OCI by a pre-tax change in value of $6 million as measured by the change in the value 
of the securities for a one basis point parallel increase in yields. The portfolio also exposes us to credit spread risk of a pre-tax 
change in value of $16 million, as measured by the change in value for a one basis point widening of credit spreads. The value of 
the investment securities carried at FVOCI included in our IRRBB measures as at October 31, 2022 was $90 billion. Our investment 
securities carried at FVOCI also include equity exposures of $1 billion as at October 31, 2022, compared to $1 billion at the end of 
the prior year. 

Non-trading foreign exchange rate risk  
Foreign exchange rate risk is the potential adverse impact on earnings and economic value due to changes in foreign currency  
rates. Our revenue, expenses and income denominated in currencies other than the Canadian dollar are subject to  
fluctuations as a result of changes in the value of the average Canadian dollar relative to the average value of those  
currencies. Our most significant exposure is to the U.S. dollar, due to our operations in the U.S. and other activities conducted  
in U.S. dollars. Other significant exposures are to the British pound and the Euro, due to our activities conducted  
internationally in these currencies. A strengthening or weakening of the Canadian dollar compared to the U.S. dollar, British  
pound and the Euro could reduce or increase, as applicable, the translated value of our foreign currency denominated  
revenue, expenses and earnings and could have a significant effect on the results of our operations. We are also exposed to  
foreign exchange rate risk arising from our investments in foreign operations. For unhedged equity investments, when the  
Canadian dollar appreciates against other currencies, the unrealized translation losses on net foreign investments decreases  
our shareholders’ equity through the other components of equity and decreases the translated value of the RWA of the foreign  
currency-denominated asset. The reverse is true when the Canadian dollar depreciates against other currencies.  
Consequently, we consider these impacts in selecting an appropriate level of our investments in foreign operations to be  
hedged.  

Derivatives related to non-trading activity 
Derivatives are also used to hedge market risk exposure unrelated to our trading activity. Hedge accounting is elected where 
applicable. These derivatives are included in our IRRBB measures and other internal non-trading market risk measures. We use 
interest rate swaps to manage our IRRBB, funding and investment activities. Interest rate swaps are also used to hedge changes 
in the fair value of certain fixed-rate instruments. We also use foreign exchange derivatives to manage our exposure to equity 
investments in subsidiaries that are denominated in foreign currencies, particularly the U.S. dollar, British Pound, and Euro. 

For further details on the application of hedge accounting and the use of derivatives for hedging activities, refer to Notes 2 and 9 
of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

79 

Linkage of market risk to selected balance sheet items 
The following tables provide the linkages between selected balance sheet items with positions included in our trading market risk 
and non-trading market risk disclosures, which illustrates how we manage market risk for our assets and liabilities through 
different risk measures: 

Linkage of market risk to selected balance sheet items  

Table 52   

  

  

  

Market risk measure  

  

As at October 31, 2022  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Assets subject to market risk  
Cash and due from banks  
Interest-bearing deposits with banks  
Securities  
Trading  
Investment, net of applicable allowance  
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase  

agreements and securities borrowed  

Loans  

Retail  
Wholesale  
Allowance for loan losses  
Segregated fund net assets  
Other  

Derivatives  
Other assets  

Total assets  

Assets not subject to market risk (3)  

Liabilities subject to market risk  
Deposits  
Segregated fund liabilities  
Other  

Obligations related to securities sold short  
Obligations related to assets sold  

under repurchase agreements and  
securities loaned  

Derivatives  
Other liabilities  

Subordinated debentures  
Liabilities not subject to market risk (4)  

Balance sheet  

amount   Traded risk (1)  

Non-traded  
risk (2)  

Non-traded risk   
primary risk sensitivity   

  

$

72,397   $

  

–   $

108,011  
  
148,205  
170,018  

317,845  
  
549,751  
273,967  
(3,753)  
2,638  
  
154,439  
109,629  
14,072  

84,468  
  
137,293  
–  

264,665  
  
6,128  
8,558  
–  
–  
  
151,244  
8,826  
  

  
72,397  
23,543  
  
10,912  
170,018  

  
Interest rate   
Interest rate   
  
Interest rate, credit spread   
Interest rate, credit spread, equity   

53,180  
  
543,623  
265,409  
(3,753)  
2,638  
  
3,195  
100,803  
  

Interest rate   
  
Interest rate   
Interest rate   
Interest rate   
Interest rate   
  
Interest rate, foreign exchange   
Interest rate   
  

$

$

1,917,219   $

661,182   $ 1,241,965  

  

1,208,814   $

2,638  
  
35,511  

  

  
141,319   $ 1,067,495  
2,638  
  
–  

–  
  
35,511  

273,947  
153,491  
102,881  
10,025  
21,737  

248,712  
139,406  
10,594  
–  
  

25,235  
14,085  
92,287  
10,025  
  

Interest rate   
Interest rate, foreign exchange   
Interest rate   
Interest rate   
  

  
Interest rate   
Interest rate   
  
  

  

  

  

  

Total liabilities  

Total equity  

Total liabilities and equity  

$

1,809,044   $

575,542   $ 1,211,765  

108,175  

$

1,917,219  

  

  

  

  

(1) 

Traded risk includes positions that are classified or designated as FVTPL and positions whose revaluation gains and losses are reported in revenue. Market risk 
measures of VaR, SVaR, IRC and stress tests are used as risk controls for traded risk. 

(2)  Non-traded risk includes positions used in the management of IRRBB and other non-trading portfolios. Other material non-trading portfolios include positions from RBC 

Insurance® and investment securities, net of applicable allowance, not included in IRRBB. 
Assets not subject to market risk include physical and other assets. 
Liabilities not subject to market risk include payroll related and other liabilities. 

(3) 
(4) 

80

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

  

  

As at October 31, 2021  

Market risk measure  

Balance sheet  

amount   Traded risk (1)  

Non-traded  
risk (2)  

Non-traded risk   
primary risk sensitivity   

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Assets subject to market risk  
Cash and due from banks  
Interest-bearing deposits with banks  
Securities  
Trading  
Investment, net of applicable allowance  
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase  

agreements and securities borrowed  

Loans  

Retail  
Wholesale  
Allowance for loan losses  
Segregated fund net assets  
Other  

Derivatives  
Other assets  

Total assets  

Assets not subject to market risk (3)  

Liabilities subject to market risk  
Deposits  
Segregated fund liabilities  
Other  

Obligations related to securities sold short  
Obligations related to assets sold  

under repurchase agreements and  
securities loaned  

Derivatives  
Other liabilities  

Subordinated debentures  
Liabilities not subject to market risk (4)  

Total liabilities  

Total equity  

Total liabilities and equity  

$

$

$

$

$

  

  

113,846   $
79,638  
  
139,240  
145,484  

307,903  
  
503,598  
218,066  
(4,089)  
2,666  
  
95,541  
92,157  
12,273  

  

–   $

56,896  
  
127,259  
–  

265,011  
  
9,231  
9,685  
–  
–  
  
92,829  
8,615  
  

1,706,323   $

569,526   $

1,124,524  

  

  

1,100,831   $

136,927   $

2,666  
  
37,841  

–  
  
37,841  

262,201  
91,439  
87,084  
9,593  
15,906  

98,762  

1,706,323  

236,146  
89,290  
8,528  
–  
  

  

  

1,607,561   $

508,732   $

1,082,923  

  
Interest rate   
Interest rate   
  
Interest rate, credit spread   
Interest rate, credit spread, equity   

Interest rate   
  
Interest rate   
Interest rate   
Interest rate   
Interest rate   
  
Interest rate, foreign exchange   
Interest rate   
  

  
Interest rate   
Interest rate   
  
  

Interest rate   
Interest rate, foreign exchange   
Interest rate   
Interest rate   
  

  

  

  

  

  

  
113,846  
22,742  
  
11,981  
145,484  

42,892  
  
494,367  
208,381  
(4,089)  
2,666  
  
2,712  
83,542  
  

  
963,904  
2,666  
  
–  

26,055  
2,149  
78,556  
9,593  
  

  

  

(1) 

Traded risk includes positions that are classified or designated as FVTPL and positions whose revaluation gains and losses are reported in revenue. Market risk 
measures of VaR, SVaR, IRC and stress tests are used as risk controls for traded risk. 

(2)  Non-traded risk includes positions used in the management of IRRBB and other non-trading portfolios. Other material non-trading portfolios include positions from RBC 

Insurance® and investment securities, net of applicable allowance, not included in IRRBB. 
Assets not subject to market risk include physical and other assets. 
Liabilities not subject to market risk include payroll related and other liabilities. 

(3) 
(4) 

Liquidity and funding risk  

Liquidity and funding risk (liquidity risk) is the risk that we may be unable to generate sufficient cash or its equivalents in a  
timely and cost-effective manner to meet our commitments. Liquidity risk arises from mismatches in the timing and value of  
on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet cash flows.  

Our liquidity profile is structured to ensure that we have sufficient liquidity to satisfy current and prospective  

commitments in both normal and stressed conditions. To achieve this goal, we operate under a comprehensive Liquidity Risk  
Management Framework (LRMF) and Pledging Policy. We also employ several liquidity risk mitigation strategies that include:  
Achieving an appropriate balance between the level of exposure allowed under our risk appetite and the cost of risk  
(cid:129)
mitigation;  

(cid:129) Maintaining broad funding access, including preserving and promoting a reliable base of core client deposits and ongoing  

access to diversified wholesale funding sources;  
A comprehensive liquidity stress testing program, contingency, recovery and resolution planning and status monitoring to  
ensure sufficiency of unencumbered marketable securities and demonstrated capacity to monetize specific asset classes;  
Governance of pledging activity through limits and liquid asset buffers for potential pledging activity;  
Timely and granular risk measurement information;  
Transparent liquidity transfer pricing and cost allocation; and  
Our three lines of defense governance model.  

(cid:129)

(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

81 

Risk control 
Our liquidity risk objectives, policies, models and methodologies are reviewed regularly, and are updated to reflect changing 
market conditions and business mix. This includes aligning with local regulatory developments. We continue to maintain 
liquidity and funding that is appropriate for the execution of our strategy. Liquidity risk remains well within our risk appetite. 

The Board annually approves the enterprise liquidity risk appetite recommended by the Risk Committee of the Board. The 
Risk Committee of the Board reviews and recommends the liquidity risk appetite and approves the LRMF. The Board, the Risk 
Committee of the Board, the GRC and the ALCO regularly review reporting on our consolidated liquidity position. The GRC, the 
Policy Review Committee (PRC) and/or the ALCO also review liquidity documents prepared for the Board or its committees. 
(cid:129)

The PRC approves the Liquidity Risk Policy, which establishes minimum risk control elements in accordance with the 
Board-approved risk appetite and the LRMF, and the Pledging Policy, which outlines the requirements and authorities for 
the management of our pledging activities. 
The ALCO annually approves the Enterprise Liquidity Contingency Plan (ELCP) and provides strategic direction and 
oversight to Corporate Treasury, other functions, and business segments on the management of liquidity. 

(cid:129)

These policies are supported by operational, desk and product-level policies that implement risk control elements, such as 
parameters, methodologies, management limits and authorities that govern the measurement and management of liquidity. 
Stress testing is also employed to assess the robustness of the control framework and inform liquidity contingency plans. 

Risk measurement 

Liquidity risk is measured by applying scenario-specific assumptions against our assets and liabilities and off-balance sheet 
commitments to derive expected cash flow profiles over varying time horizons. For example, government bonds generally can 
be quickly and easily converted to cash without significant loss of value regardless of their contractual maturity. Similarly, 
while relationship-based deposits contractually can be withdrawn immediately, in practice, these balances can be relatively 
stable sources of funding depending on several factors, such as the nature of the client and their intended use. Risk 
methodologies and underlying assumptions are periodically reviewed and validated to ensure their alignment with our 
operating environment, expected economic and market conditions, rating agency preferences, regulatory requirements and 
generally accepted industry practices. 

To manage liquidity risk within our liquidity risk appetite, we set limits on various metrics reflecting a range of time horizons 
and severity of stress conditions and develop contingency, recovery and resolution plans. Our liquidity risk measurement and 
control activities are divided into three categories as follows: 

Structural (longer-term) liquidity risk 
To guide our secured and unsecured wholesale term funding activities, we employ both internal and regulatory metrics to 
manage and control the structural alignment between long-term illiquid assets and longer-term funding sourced from 
wholesale investors and core relationship deposits. 

Tactical (shorter-term) liquidity risk 
To address potential immediate cash flow risks in times of stress, we use short-term net cash flow limits to control risk of 
material units, subsidiaries and currencies, and perform stress testing assessments. Net cash flow positions are determined 
by applying internally-derived risk assumptions and parameters to known and anticipated cash flows for all material 
unencumbered assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet activities. Encumbered assets are not considered a source of available 
liquidity. We also control tactical liquidity by adhering to relevant regulatory standards, such as LCR. 

Contingency liquidity risk 
Contingency liquidity risk planning assesses the impact of sudden stress events and our planned responses. Our ELCP, 
maintained and administered by Corporate Treasury, has been developed to guide our potential responses to liquidity crises. 
Under leadership of Corporate Treasury, both enterprise and regional Liquidity Crisis Teams (LCT) meet regularly to assess 
our liquidity status, approve the ELCP, and in times of stress provide valuable linkages to front line and risk functions to 
support the crisis management process. LCT’s include members from key business segments, GRM, Finance, Operations, and 
Communications with relevant subject matter expertise. 

Our stress tests, which include elements of scenario and sensitivity analyses, measure our prospective exposure to systemic 

and RBC-specific events over a period of several weeks. Different levels of severity are considered for each type of crisis with 
some scenarios reflecting multiple-downgrades to our credit ratings. 

The contingency liquidity risk planning process identifies contingent funding needs (e.g., draws on committed credit and 
liquidity lines, demands for more collateral and deposit run-off) and sources (e.g., contingent liquid asset sales and incremental 
wholesale funding capacity) under various stress scenarios, and as a result, informs requirements for our earmarked 
unencumbered liquid asset portfolios. 

Our unencumbered liquid asset portfolios consist of diversified, highly rated and liquid marketable securities, overnight 
government reverse repos and deposits with central banks. These portfolios are subject to minimum asset quality levels and, as 
appropriate, other eligibility guidelines (e.g., maturity, diversification and eligibility for central bank advances) to maximize ready 
access to additional cash should it be required. These securities, when added to other unencumbered liquid assets that we hold 
as a result of capital markets or other activities, contribute to our liquidity reserve, and are reflected in the asset encumbrance 
disclosures shown below. 

82

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Liquidity reserve and asset encumbrance 
The following tables provide summaries of our liquidity reserve and asset encumbrance. In both tables, unencumbered assets 
represent, to varying degrees, a ready source of funding. Unencumbered assets are the difference between total and encumbered 
assets from both on- and off-balance sheet sources. The encumbered assets include: (i) bank-owned liquid assets that are either 
pledged as collateral (e.g., repo financing and derivative pledging) or not freely available due to regulatory or internal policy 
requirements (e.g., earmarked to satisfy mandatory reserve or regional capital adequacy requirements and to maintain 
continuous access to payment and settlement systems); (ii) securities received as collateral from securities financing and 
derivative transactions which have either been re-hypothecated where permissible (e.g., to obtain financing through repos or to 
cover securities sold short) or have no liquidity value since re-hypothecation is prohibited; and (iii) illiquid assets that have been 
securitized and sold into the market or that have been pledged as collateral in support of structured term funding vehicles. As 
per our liquidity management framework and practice, encumbered assets are not considered a source of liquidity. 

Liquidity reserve 
Our liquidity reserve consists of available unencumbered liquid assets. Although unused wholesale funding capacity, which is 
regularly assessed, could be another potential source of liquidity to mitigate stressed conditions, it is excluded in the 
determination of the liquidity reserve. Similarly, uncommitted and undrawn central bank borrowing facilities that could be 
accessed subject to satisfying certain preconditions as set by various central banks (e.g., BoC, the Fed, Bank of England, and 
Bank of France), as well as amounts that qualify as eligible collateral at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) and 
Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) are also excluded from the determination of the liquidity reserve. 

Liquidity reserve  

Table 53   

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Cash and deposits with banks  
Securities issued or guaranteed by sovereigns, central  

banks or multilateral development banks (1)  

Other securities  
Other liquid assets (2)  

Total liquid assets  

Bank-owned  
liquid assets  

Total liquid  
assets  

Encumbered  
liquid assets  

Unencumbered  
liquid assets  

$ 180,408   $

 –   $

 180,408   $

 3,601   $ 176,807  

246,916  
110,057  
42,090  

326,089  
119,129  
–  

573,005  
229,186  
42,090  

373,893  
135,349  
40,318  

199,112  
93,837  
1,772  

$ 579,471   $ 445,218   $ 1,024,689   $ 553,161   $ 471,528  

As at October 31, 2022  

Securities  
received as  
collateral from  
securities  
financing and  
derivative  
transactions  

  

As at October 31, 2021  

Securities  
received as  
collateral from  
securities  
financing and  
derivative  
transactions  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Cash and deposits with banks  
Securities issued or guaranteed by sovereigns, central  

banks or multilateral development banks (1)  

Other securities  
Other liquid assets (2)  

Total liquid assets  

Bank-owned  
liquid assets  

Total liquid  
assets  

Encumbered  
liquid assets  

Unencumbered  
liquid assets  

$

193,484   $

–   $

193,484   $

3,405   $

190,079  

214,326  
114,692  
27,600  

313,732  
115,396  
–  

528,058  
230,088  
27,600  

357,927  
132,360  
25,981  

170,131  
97,728  
1,619  

$

550,102   $ 429,128   $

979,230   $ 519,673   $

459,557  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Royal Bank of Canada  
Foreign branches  
Subsidiaries  

Total unencumbered liquid assets  

  

As at   

  

October 31  
2022  

October 31  
2021  
$ 186,855   $ 233,342  
68,567  
157,648  

90,910  
193,763  

$ 471,528   $ 459,557  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  
  
  

  

  

  
  
  

  

  

  
  
  

  

(1) 

(2) 

Includes liquid securities issued by provincial governments and U.S. government-sponsored entities working under U.S. Federal government’s conservatorship (e.g., 
Federal National Mortgage Association and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation). 
Encumbered liquid assets amount represents cash collateral and margin deposit amounts pledged related to OTC and exchange-traded derivative transactions. 

The liquidity reserve is typically most affected by routine flows of client banking activity where liquid asset portfolios reflect 
changes in deposit and loan balances, as well as by activities in Capital Markets and Investor & Treasury Services, where 
business strategies and client flows may also affect liquidity reserve balances. Corporate Treasury also affects liquidity reserves 
through the management of funding issuances where reserves absorb timing mismatches between debt issuances and 
deployment into business activities. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

83 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Cash and deposits  

with banks  

Securities  
Trading  
Investment, net of  

applicable allowance  

Assets purchased under  
reverse repurchase  
agreements and  
securities borrowed (4)  

Loans  

Retail  

Mortgage securities  
Mortgage loans  
Non-mortgage loans  

Wholesale  

Allowance for loan losses  
Segregated fund net assets  
Other  

Derivatives  
Others (5)  

Total assets  

Funding 

2022 vs. 2021 
Total unencumbered liquid assets increased $12 billion or 3% from last year, mainly due to an increase in on-balance sheet 
securities reflecting higher wholesale funding and client deposit levels. 

Asset encumbrance 
The table below provides a summary of our on- and off-balance sheet amounts for cash, securities and other assets, 
distinguishing between those that are encumbered or available for sale or use as collateral in secured funding transactions. 
Other assets, such as mortgages and credit card receivables, can also be monetized, albeit over longer timeframes than those 
required for marketable securities. As at October 31, 2022, our unencumbered assets available as collateral comprised 24% of 
total assets (October 31, 2021 – 26%). 

Asset encumbrance  

Table 54   

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

collateral   Other (1)    

Other (3)  

Total     

collateral   Other (1)    

Pledged as  

Available as  
collateral (2)  

Pledged as  

Available as  
collateral (2)   Other (3)  

Total  

Encumbered  

  

Unencumbered  

Encumbered  

  

Unencumbered  

  

October 31  
2022  

October 31  
2021  

As at  

  

     

$

–   $ 3,601     $ 176,807   $

  
62,941  

    
–    

  
91,738  

–   $
  
3,303  

180,408     $

     
157,982     

  
56,602  

–   $ 3,405     $

190,079   $

  
87,311  

–   $ 193,484  
  
147,546  

  
3,633  

7,996  

–    

162,022  

–  

170,018     

12,055  

133,429  

–  

145,484  

    
–    

–    

456,292  
  
  
28,208  
62,905  
6,066  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
40,318  

21,709    
    
    
–    
–    
–    
–    
–    
–    
    
–    
–    

9,192  
  
  
27,263  
26,696  
–  
9,119  
–  
–  
  
–  
1,772  

3,409  
  
  
–  
273,724  
124,889  
264,848  
(3,753)  
2,638  
  
154,439  
81,611  

490,602      437,408  
  
  
29,370  
46,699  
3,213  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
25,981  

     
     
55,471     
363,325     
130,955     
273,967     
(3,753)    
2,638     
     
154,439     
123,701     

18,310    
    
    
–    
–    
–    
–    
–    
–    
    
–    
–    

17,436  
  
  
30,778  
29,858  
8,110  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
1,619  

5,343  
  
  
–  
243,627  
111,943  
218,066  
(4,089)  
2,666  
  
95,541  
76,830  

478,497  
  
  
60,148  
320,184  
123,266  
218,066  
(4,089)  
2,666  
  
95,541  
104,430  

$ 664,726   $ 25,310     $ 504,609   $ 905,108   $ 2,099,753     $ 611,328   $ 21,715     $

498,620   $ 753,560   $1,885,223  

Includes assets restricted from use to generate secured funding due to legal or other constraints. 

(1) 
(2)  Represents assets that are readily available for use as collateral, including NHA MBS, our unencumbered mortgage loans that qualify as eligible collateral at FHLB, as 

well as loans that qualify as eligible collateral for discount window facility available to us and lodged at the FRBNY. 

(3)  Other unencumbered assets are not subject to any restrictions on their use to secure funding or as collateral but would not be considered readily available. 
(4) 

Includes bank-owned liquid assets and securities received as collateral from off-balance sheet securities financing, derivative transactions, and margin lending. Includes 
$22 billion (October 31, 2021 – $18 billion) of collateral received through reverse repurchase transactions that cannot be rehypothecated in its current legal form. 
The Pledged as collateral amount represents cash collateral and margin deposit amounts pledged related to OTC and exchange-traded derivative transactions. 

(5) 

Funding strategy  
Core funding, comprising capital, longer-term wholesale liabilities and a diversified pool of personal and, to a lesser extent,  
commercial and institutional deposits, is the foundation of our structural liquidity position.  

Deposit and funding profile 
As at October 31, 2022, relationship-based deposits, which are the primary source of funding for retail and commercial lending, 
were $819 billion or 54% of our total funding (October 31, 2021 – $771 billion or 55%). The remaining portion is comprised of 
short-and long-term wholesale funding. 

Funding for highly liquid assets consists primarily of short-term wholesale funding that reflects the monetization period of 
those assets. Long-term wholesale funding is used mostly to fund less liquid wholesale assets and to support liquid asset buffers. 
Senior long-term debt issued by the bank on or after September 23, 2018, that has an original term greater than 400 days and 

is marketable, subject to certain exceptions, is subject to the Canadian Bank Recapitalization (Bail-in) regime. Under the Bail-in 
regime, in circumstances when the Superintendent of Financial Institutions has determined that a bank may no longer be viable, 
the Governor in Council may, upon a recommendation of the Minister of Finance that he or she is of the opinion that it is in the 
public interest to do so, grant an order directing the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation (CDIC) to convert all or a portion of 
certain shares and liabilities of that bank into common shares. As at October 31, 2022, the notional value of issued and 
outstanding long-term debt subject to conversion under the Bail-in regime was $85 billion (October 31, 2021 – $53 billion). 

For further details on our wholesale funding, refer to the Composition of wholesale funding tables below. 

84

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Long-term debt issuance 
During 2022, we continued to experience favourable unsecured wholesale funding access and pricing. We issued, either directly 
or through our subsidiaries, unsecured long-term funding of $43 billion in various currencies and markets. 

We primarily use residential mortgage and credit card securitization programs as alternative sources of funding and for  
liquidity and asset/liability management purposes. Our total secured long-term funding includes outstanding MBS sold,  
covered bonds that are collateralized with residential mortgages and securities backed by credit card receivables.  

Compared to 2021, our outstanding MBS sold decreased $190 million. Our covered bonds and securitized credit card 

receivables increased $10 billion and $3 billion, respectively. 

For further details, refer to the Off-balance sheet arrangements section. 

Long-term funding sources*(1)  

Table 55   

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Unsecured long-term funding  
Secured long-term funding  
Subordinated debentures  

  

  

* 
(1) 

As at

  

October 31  

2022     

October 31  
2021  

$  119,241      $ 89,447  
56,688  
9,620  

68,953     
10,639     

$ 198,833      $ 155,755  

This table represents an integral part of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Based on original term to maturity greater than 1 year. 

Our wholesale funding activities are well-diversified by geography, investor segment, instrument, currency, structure and 
maturity. We maintain an ongoing presence in different funding markets which allows us to continuously monitor market 
developments and trends, identify opportunities and risks, and take appropriate and timely actions. We operate long-term debt 
issuance registered programs. The following table summarizes these programs with their authorized limits by geography. 

Programs by geography  

Table 56   

(cid:129) Canadian Shelf Program – $25 billion  

(cid:129) U.S. Shelf Program – US$50 billion  

Canada  

  

  

U.S.  

  

  

Europe/Asia  

(cid:129) European Debt Issuance Program – US$40 billion  
(cid:129) Global Covered Bond Program – €75 billion  

(cid:129)

Japanese Issuance Programs – ¥1 trillion  

We also raise long-term funding using Canadian Senior Notes, Canadian National Housing Act MBS, Canada Mortgage Bonds, 
credit card receivable-backed securities, Kangaroo Bonds (issued in the Australian domestic market by foreign firms) and Yankee 
Certificates of Deposit (issued in the U.S. domestic market by foreign firms). We continuously evaluate opportunities to expand 
into new markets and untapped investor segments since diversification expands our wholesale funding flexibility, minimizes 
funding concentration and dependency, and generally reduces financing costs. As presented in the following charts, our current 
long-term debt profile is well-diversified by both currency and product. Maintaining competitive credit ratings is also critical to 
cost-effective funding. 

Long-term debt (1) – funding mix by currency of issuance

Long-term debt (1) – funding mix by product

U.S. dollar
46%

Euro
18%

Other
10%

MBS/CMB (2)
8%

Covered Bonds
23%

Cards
securitization
3%

Subordinated
debentures
5%

  

Canadian dollar
26%

  

Unsecured
funding
61%

(1)  

Includes unsecured and secured long-term funding and subordinated  
debentures with an original term to maturity greater than 1 year  

(1)  

Includes unsecured and secured long-term funding and subordinated  
debentures with an original term to maturity greater than 1 year  

(2)   Mortgage-backed securities and Canada Mortgage Bonds  

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

85 

The following table provides our composition of wholesale funding based on remaining term to maturity: 

Composition of wholesale funding (1)  

Table 57   

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Deposits from banks (2)  
Certificates of deposit and commercial paper  
Asset-backed commercial paper (3)  
Senior unsecured medium-term notes (4)  
Senior unsecured structured notes (5)  
Mortgage securitization  
Covered bonds/asset-backed securities (6)  
Subordinated liabilities  
Other (7)  

Total  

Of which:  
– Secured  
– Unsecured  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Deposits from banks (2)  
Certificates of deposit and commercial paper  
Asset-backed commercial paper (3)  
Senior unsecured medium-term notes (4)  
Senior unsecured structured notes (5)  
Mortgage securitization  
Covered bonds/asset-backed securities (6)  
Subordinated liabilities  
Other (7)  

Total  

Of which:  
– Secured  
– Unsecured  

As at October 31, 2022  

34  $ 

311  $  1,766  $ 

7,869  $

Less than  
1 month  

1 to 3  
months  

3 to 6  
months  

6 to 12  
months  

$  5,758  $ 
9,482  
3,488  
375  
404  
–  
–  
60  
7,241  

16,575  
2,373  
5,968  
721  
1,238  
1,016  
–  
2,934  

23,676  
6,646  
2,846  
2,136  
421  
1,960  
–  
8,673  

39,674  
722  
13,189  
4,091  
2,614  
2,838  
110  
4,387  

Less than  
1 year  
sub-total  

89,407  
13,229  
22,378  
7,352  
4,273  
5,814  
170  
23,235  

1 year to  
2 years  

2 years and  
greater  

–  $
–  
–  
19,108  
2,363  
2,402  
4,575  
1,483  
10,219  

–  $ 
–  
323  
48,556  
9,898  
9,697  
42,194  
8,986  
409  

Total  

7,869  
89,407  
13,552  
90,042  
19,613  
16,372  
52,583  
10,639  
33,863  

$ 26,808  $ 30,859  $ 46,669  $ 69,391  $ 173,727  $ 40,150  $ 120,063  $ 333,940  

  

  
$  9,030  $ 6,641  $ 15,367  $ 7,536  $ 38,574  $ 6,977  $ 52,605  $ 98,156  
235,784  

135,153  

31,302  

24,218  

17,778  

61,855  

33,173  

67,458  

  

  

  

  

  

  

As at October 31, 2021  

Less than  
1 month  

1 to 3  
months  

3 to 6  
months  

6 to 12  
months  

1 year to  
2 years  

2 years and  
greater  

$

–  $

–  $

–  $

5,202  $

–  $

5,202  $
7,118  
2,378  
27  
118  
–  
–  
–  
6,637  

17,013  
2,563  
939  
825  
354  
847  
–  
2,194  

19,046  
4,076  
8,944  
817  
1,302  
495  
–  
1,448  

27,053  
3,697  
2,622  
714  
917  
5,189  
188  
827  

Less than  
1 year  
sub-total  

70,230  
12,714  
12,532  
2,474  
2,573  
6,531  
188  
11,106  

918  
–  
16,296  
2,914  
4,260  
6,087  
165  
7,531  

–  $
–  
–  
37,617  
5,879  
9,729  
27,521  
9,267  
466  

Total  

5,202  
71,148  
12,714  
66,445  
11,267  
16,562  
40,139  
9,620  
19,103  

$ 21,480  $ 24,735  $ 36,128  $ 41,207  $ 123,550  $ 38,171  $ 90,479  $ 252,200  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

$

8,467  $

4,017  $

6,108  $

9,803  $

13,013  

20,718  

30,020  

31,404  

28,395  $ 10,347  $ 37,695  $
27,824  
95,155  

52,784  

  
76,437  
175,763  

Excludes bankers’ acceptances and repos. 
Excludes deposits associated with services we provide to banks (e.g., custody, cash management). 

(1) 
(2) 
(3)  Only includes consolidated liabilities, including our collateralized commercial paper program. 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 

Includes deposit notes. 
Includes notes where the payout is tied to movements in foreign exchange, commodities and equities. 
Includes credit card and mortgage loans. 
Includes tender option bonds (secured) of $6,038 million (October 31, 2021 – $7,020 million), bearer deposit notes (unsecured) of $5,805 million (October 31, 2021 – 
$3,798 million), other long-term structured deposits (unsecured) of $12,411 million (October 31, 2021 – $8,285 million), and FHLB advances (secured) of $9,609 million 
(October 31, 2021 – $nil). 

86

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Credit ratings 
Our ability to access unsecured funding markets and to engage in certain collateralized business activities on a cost-effective 
basis are primarily dependent upon maintaining competitive credit ratings. Credit ratings and outlooks provided by rating 
agencies reflect their views and methodologies. Ratings are subject to change, based on a number of factors including, but not 
limited to, our financial strength, competitive position, liquidity and other factors not completely within our control. 

The following table presents our major credit ratings: 

Credit ratings (1)  

  

  

Short-term debt   Legacy senior long-term debt (2)   Senior long-term debt (3)   Outlook  

As at November 29, 2022  

Moody’s (4)  
Standard & Poor’s (5)  
Fitch Ratings (6)  
DBRS (7)  

P-1  
A-1+  
F1+  
R-1 (high)  

Aa1  
AA-  
AA  
AA (high)  

Table 58   

A1  
A  
AA-  
AA  

stable  
stable  
stable  
stable  

(1) 

Credit ratings are not recommendations to purchase, sell or hold a financial obligation inasmuch as they do not comment on market price or suitability 
for a particular investor. Ratings are determined by the rating agencies based on criteria established from time to time by them, and are subject to 
revision or withdrawal at any time by the rating organization. 
Includes senior long-term debt issued prior to September 23, 2018 and senior long-term debt issued on or after September 23, 2018 which is excluded from 
the Bail-in regime. 
Includes senior long-term debt issued on or after September 23, 2018 which is subject to conversion under the Bail-in regime. 

(3) 
(4)  On January 27, 2022, Moody’s upgraded our long-term debt ratings and assessments, as well as affirmed our short-term debt ratings. Following this rating 

(2) 

action, our outlook is stable. This rating action concludes the review for upgrade initiated by Moody’s on October 7, 2021. 

(5)  On May 13, 2022, Standard & Poor’s affirmed our ratings with a stable outlook. 
(6)  On July 11, 2022, Fitch Ratings affirmed our ratings with a stable outlook. 
(7)  On May 13, 2022, DBRS affirmed our ratings with a stable outlook. 

Additional contractual obligations for rating downgrades 
We are required to deliver collateral to certain counterparties in the event of a downgrade to our current credit rating. The 
following table provides the additional collateral obligations required at the reporting date in the event of a one-, two- or three-
notch downgrade to our credit ratings. These additional collateral obligations are incremental requirements for each successive 
downgrade and do not represent the cumulative impact of multiple downgrades. The amounts reported change periodically as a 
result of several factors, including the transfer of trading activity to centrally cleared financial market infrastructures and 
exchanges, the expiration of transactions with downgrade triggers, the imposition of internal limitations on new agreements to 
exclude downgrade triggers, as well as normal course mark-to-market. There is no outstanding senior debt issued in the market 
that contains rating triggers that would lead to early prepayment of principal. 

Additional contractual obligations for rating downgrades  

Table 59   

  

  

October 31  
2022  

As at   

  

October 31  
2021  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

One-notch  
downgrade  

Two-notch  
downgrade  

Three-notch  
downgrade    

One-notch  
downgrade  

Two-notch  
downgrade  

Three-notch  
downgrade  

Contractual derivatives funding or margin requirements   $
Other contractual funding or margin requirements (1)  

236   $
38  

146   $
21  

304     $
25    

312   $
157  

112   $
13  

140  
–  

(1) 

Includes GICs issued by our municipal markets business out of New York. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

87 

Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) 
The LCR is a Basel III metric that measures the sufficiency of high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) available to meet liquidity needs 
over a 30-day period in an acute stress scenario. The BCBS and OSFI regulatory minimum coverage level for LCR is 100%. 

OSFI requires Canadian banks to disclose the LCR using the standard Basel disclosure template and calculated using the 

average of daily LCR positions during the quarter. 

Liquidity coverage ratio common disclosure template (1)  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts)  

High-quality liquid assets  

Total high-quality liquid assets (HQLA)  

Cash outflows  

Stable deposits (3)  
Less stable deposits  

Retail deposits and deposits from small business customers, of which:  

$

Unsecured wholesale funding, of which:  

Operational deposits (all counterparties) and deposits in networks of cooperative banks (4)  
Non-operational deposits  
Unsecured debt  

Secured wholesale funding  
Additional requirements, of which:  

Outflows related to derivative exposures and other collateral requirements  
Outflows related to loss of funding on debt products  
Credit and liquidity facilities  

  

  

  

Other contractual funding obligations (5)  
Other contingent funding obligations (6)  

Total cash outflows  

Cash inflows  

Secured lending (e.g., reverse repos)  
Inflows from fully performing exposures  
Other cash inflows  

Total cash inflows  

Total HQLA  
Total net cash outflows  

Liquidity coverage ratio  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts)  

Total HQLA  
Total net cash outflows  

Liquidity coverage ratio  

Table 60   

For the three months ended  

October 31  
2022  

Total unweighted  
value (average) (2)  

Total weighted  
value (average)  

  
   $

  

375,324   $
127,692  
247,632  
431,484  
180,787  
220,941  
29,756  
  
334,060  
75,312  
10,214  
248,534  
22,080  
710,472  

  
364,478  

  
34,797  
3,831  
30,966  
201,688  
43,066  
128,866  
29,756  
31,881  
78,395  
21,750  
10,214  
46,431  
22,080  
11,498  

  
50,441  
9,934  
28,346  

   $

380,339  

  

  

  

  

  

   $

88,721  

Total adjusted  
value  

   $
  

364,478  
291,618  

125%  

July 31  
2022  

   $
  

Total adjusted  
value  

353,406  
287,871  

123%  

$

286,914   $
15,716  
28,346  

(1) 

The LCR is calculated in accordance with OSFI’s LAR guideline, which, in turn, reflects liquidity-related requirements issued by the BCBS. The LCR for the quarter ended 
October 31, 2022 is calculated as an average of 62 daily positions. 

(2)  With the exception of other contingent funding obligations, unweighted inflow and outflow amounts are items maturing or callable in 30 days or less. Other contingent 

(3) 

funding obligations also include debt securities with remaining maturity greater than 30 days. 
As defined by the BCBS, stable deposits from retail and small business customers are deposits that are insured and are either held in transactional accounts or the bank 
has an established relationship with the client making the withdrawal unlikely. 

(4)  Operational deposits from customers other than retail and small and medium-sized enterprises, are deposits which clients need to keep with the bank in order to 

facilitate their access and ability to use payment and settlement systems primarily for clearing, custody and cash management activities. 

(5)  Other contractual funding obligations primarily include outflows from unsettled securities trades and outflows from obligations related to securities sold short. 
(6)  Other contingent funding obligations include outflows related to other off-balance sheet facilities that carry low LCR runoff factors (0% – 5%). 

88

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

We manage our LCR position within a target range that reflects our liquidity risk tolerance and takes into account business mix, 
asset composition and funding capabilities. The range is subject to periodic review in light of changes to internal requirements 
and external developments. 

We maintain HQLAs in major currencies with dependable market depth and breadth. Our treasury management practices 
ensure that the levels of HQLA are actively managed to meet target LCR objectives. Our Level 1 assets, as calculated according to 
OSFI LAR and the BCBS LCR requirements, represent 89% of total HQLA. These assets consist of cash, placements with central 
banks and highly rated securities issued or guaranteed by governments, central banks and supranational entities. 

LCR captures cash flows from on- and off-balance sheet activities that are either expected or could potentially occur within 
30 days in an acute stress scenario. Cash outflows result from the application of withdrawal and non-renewal factors to demand 
and term deposits, differentiated by client type (wholesale, retail and small- and medium-sized enterprises). Cash outflows also 
arise from business activities that create contingent funding and collateral requirements, such as repo funding, derivatives, short 
sales of securities and the extension of credit and liquidity commitments to clients. Cash inflows arise primarily from maturing 
secured loans, interbank loans and non-HQLA securities. 

LCR does not reflect any market funding capacity that we believe would be available in a stress situation. All maturing 

wholesale debt is assigned 100% outflow in the LCR calculation. 

Q4 2022 vs. Q3 2022 
The average LCR for the quarter ended October 31, 2022 was 125%, which translates into a surplus of approximately $73 billion, 
compared to 123% and a surplus of approximately $66 billion in the prior quarter. LCR has increased compared to last quarter as 
loan growth was more than offset by an increase in volume and change in mix of client deposits, as well as by issuances of term 
funding. 

Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) 
NSFR is a Basel III metric that measures the sufficiency of available stable funding relative to the amount of required stable 
funding. The BCBS and OSFI regulatory minimum coverage level for NSFR is 100%. 

Available stable funding is defined as the portion of capital and liabilities expected to be reliable over the time horizon 
considered by the NSFR, which extends to one year. Required stable funding is a function of the liquidity characteristics and 
residual maturities of the various assets held by the bank as well as those of its off-balance sheet exposures. 

OSFI requires Canadian D-SIBs to disclose the NSFR using the standard Basel disclosure template. Amounts presented in this 
disclosure template are determined in accordance with the requirements of OSFI’s LAR guideline and are not necessarily aligned 
with the classification requirements prescribed under IFRS. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

89 

Net Stable Funding Ratio common disclosure template (1)  

Table 61   

  

  

  

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(5) 

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts)  

No maturity  

< 6 months  

Retail deposits and deposits from small business customers:  

Available Stable Funding (ASF) Item  

Capital:  

Regulatory Capital  
Other Capital Instruments  

Stable deposits (3)  
Less stable deposits  

Wholesale funding:  

Operational deposits (4)  
Other wholesale funding  

Liabilities with matching interdependent assets (5)  
Other liabilities:  

NSFR derivative liabilities  
All other liabilities and equity not included in the  

above categories  

Total ASF  

Required Stable Funding (RSF) Item  

Total NSFR high-quality liquid assets (HQLA)  
Deposits held at other financial institutions for  

operational purposes  

Performing loans and securities:  

Performing loans to financial institutions secured by  

Level 1 HQLA  

Performing loans to financial institutions secured by  

non-Level 1 HQLA and unsecured performing loans to  
financial institutions  

Performing loans to non-financial corporate clients, loans to  

retail and small business customers, and loans to sovereigns,  
central banks and PSEs, of which:  

With a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under the  

Basel II standardized approach for credit risk  

Performing residential mortgages, of which:  

With a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under the  

Basel II standardized approach for credit risk  

Securities that are not in default and do not qualify as HQLA,  

including exchange-traded equities  

Assets with matching interdependent liabilities (5)  
Other assets:  

Physical traded commodities, including gold  
Assets posted as initial margin for derivative contracts and  

contributions to default funds of CCPs  

NSFR derivative assets  
NSFR derivative liabilities before deduction of variation  

margin posted  

Off-balance sheet items  

Total RSF  

Net Stable Funding Ratio (%)  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts)  

Total ASF  

Total RSF  

Net Stable Funding Ratio (%)  

As at October 31, 2022  

Unweighted value by residual maturity (2)  

6 months to  
< 1 year  

> 1 year  

Weighted  
value  

  

$ 108,053   $
108,053  
–  
326,492  
106,488  
220,004  
312,346  
186,282  
126,064  
–  
41,545  
  

  
–   $
–  
–  
71,417  
32,742  
38,675  
438,928  
–  
438,928  
3,298  
  

  
–   $
–  
–  
37,631  
20,284  
17,347  
79,690  
–  
79,690  
4,950  
214,175  
34,934  

  

  
9,608   $ 117,661  
117,661  
9,608  
–  
–  
431,963  
32,190  
165,785  
14,246  
266,178  
17,944  
340,812  
121,004  
93,141  
–  
247,671  
121,004  
21,456  
–  
14,020  
  
  

41,545  

164,329  

1,785  

13,127  

14,020  

   $ 904,456  

  
  
   $ 38,537  

–  
198,407  

1,403  
295,131  

–  
107,266  

–  
507,939  

701  
661,461  

–  

111,525  

15,189  

15  

14,312  

4,000  

99,000  

26,949  

26,099  

54,587  

121,583  

63,827  

30,277  

156,711  

279,382  

–  
38,539  

843  
17,969  

691  
33,986  

3,181  
298,856  

2,834  
259,881  

38,539  

17,952  

33,951  

297,918  

259,057  

34,285  
–  
1,772  
1,772  

2,810  
3,298  
  

  

865  
4,950  
300,342  
  

26,258  
21,456  
  
  

26,604  
26,795  

70,722  

711,922  

As at July 31, 2022  

53,299  
–  
81,558  
1,506  

22,613  
–  

3,536  
53,903  

26,997  

   $ 809,254  

112%  

  

Weighted  
value  

   $ 884,887  

784,537  

113%  

  

  

  

  

  

  
  

  
–  

  
  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  
  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  
  

  

  

  

  

  

  

All other assets not included in the above categories  

123,852  

8  

52,361  

The NSFR is calculated in accordance with OSFI’s Liquidity Adequacy Requirements (LAR) guideline, which, in turn, reflects liquidity-related requirements issued by the 
BCBS. 
Totals for the following rows encompass the residual maturity categories of less than 6 months, 6 months to less than 1 year, and greater than or equal to 1 year in 
accordance with the requirements of the common disclosure template prescribed by OSFI: Other liabilities, NSFR derivative liabilities, Other assets, Assets posted as 
initial margin for derivative contracts and contributions to default funds of CCPs, NSFR derivative assets, NSFR derivative liabilities before deduction of variation margin 
posted, and Off-balance sheet items. 
As defined by the BCBS, stable deposits from retail and small business customers are deposits that are insured and are either held in transactional accounts or the bank 
has an established relationship with the client making the withdrawal unlikely. 

(4)  Operational deposits from customers other than retail and small and medium-sized enterprises, are deposits which clients need to keep with the bank in order to 

facilitate their access and ability to use payment and settlement systems primarily for clearing, custody and cash management activities. 
Interdependent assets and liabilities represent National Housing Act Mortgage-Backed Securities (NHA MBS) liabilities, including liabilities arising from transactions 
involving the Canada Mortgage Bond program and their corresponding encumbered mortgages. 

90

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Available stable funding is comprised primarily of a diversified pool of personal and commercial deposits, capital, as well as 
long-term wholesale liabilities. Required stable funding is driven mainly by the bank’s mortgage and loan portfolio, secured loans 
to financial institutions and to a lesser extent by other less liquid assets. NSFR does not reflect any unused market funding 
capacity that we believe is available to the bank. 

Volume and composition of available stable funding is actively managed to optimize our structural funding position and 

meet NSFR objectives. Our NSFR is managed in accordance with our comprehensive LRMF. 

Q4 2022 vs. Q3 2022 
The NSFR as at October 31, 2022 was 112%, which translates into a surplus of approximately $95 billion, compared to 113% and a 
surplus of approximately $100 billion in the prior quarter. NSFR remained relatively flat compared to last quarter as growth in 
loans and securities was offset by issuance of term funding and increases in client deposits. 

Contractual maturities of financial assets, financial liabilities and off-balance sheet items 
The following tables provide remaining contractual maturity profiles of all our assets, liabilities, and off-balance sheet items at 
their carrying value (e.g., amortized cost or fair value) at the balance sheet date. Off-balance sheet items are allocated based on 
the expiry date of the contract. 

Details of contractual maturities and commitments to extend funds are a source of information for the management of 

liquidity risk. Among other purposes, these details form a basis for modelling a behavioural balance sheet with effective 
maturities to calculate liquidity risk measures. For further details, refer to the Risk measurement section. 

Contractual maturities of financial assets, financial liabilities and off-balance sheet items  

Table 62   

  

As at October 31, 2022  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Assets  
Cash and deposits with banks  
Securities  

Trading (1)  
Investment, net of applicable  

allowance  

Assets purchased under reverse  
repurchase agreements and  
securities borrowed (2)  

Loans, net of applicable allowance  
Other  

Customers’ liability  

under acceptances  

Derivatives  
Other financial assets  

Total financial assets  
Other non-financial assets  

Liabilities and equity  
Deposits (3)  

Unsecured borrowing  
Secured borrowing  
Covered bonds  

Other  

Acceptances  
Obligations related to securities  

sold short  

Obligations related to assets sold  
under repurchase agreements  
and securities loaned (2)  

Derivatives  
Other financial liabilities  

Subordinated debentures  

Total financial liabilities  
Other non-financial liabilities  
Equity  

Less than  
1 month  

1 to 3  
months  

3 to 6  
months  

6 to 9  
months  

9 to 12  
months  

1 year  
to 2 years  

2 years  
to 5 years  

5 years  
and greater  

  

$ 177,946   $

  
86,491  

  
2   $
  
592  

  
–   $
  
71  

  
–   $
  
8  

  
–   $
  
–  

  
–   $
  
104  

  
–   $
  
170  

  
–   $
  
8,710  

  

2,460   $

  
52,059  

Total  

  
180,408  
  
148,205  

With no  
specific  
maturity  

3,250  

7,490  

7,390  

3,537  

4,873  

12,303  

50,979  

79,387  

809  

170,018  

122,836  
31,203  
  

76,590  
21,795  
  

58,750  
29,253  
  

19,246  
39,919  
  

17,212  
34,658  
  

1,131  
150,826  
  

–  
348,411  
  

11,632  
13,100  
48,485  

6,235  
19,753  
1,964  

5  
10,184  
1,666  

–  
7,004  
199  

–  
6,009  
457  

–  
20,709  
246  

–  
36,081  
231  

–  
75,091  
  

–  
41,571  
2,364  

22,080  
88,809  
  

317,845  
819,965  
  

(45)  
28  
3,025  

17,827  
154,439  
58,637  

494,943  
6,744  

134,421   107,319  
196  

1,609  

69,913  
(357)  

63,209  
2,647  

185,319  
1,691  

435,872  
2,510  

207,123  
5,192  

169,225  
29,643  

1,867,344  
49,875  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

$ 91,052   $ 56,920   $ 52,671   $ 64,685   $ 83,220   $

39,327   $ 60,161   $

4,343  
–  
  
11,632  

6,271  
1,016  
  
6,235  

7,365  
1,960  
  
5  

2,007  
1,993  
  
–  

4,626  
–  
  
–  

6,059  
3,839  
  
–  

15,400  
28,692  
  
–  

  
  

  
  

  
  
18,500   $ 645,195   $ 1,111,731  
53,895  
43,188  
  
17,872  

7,824  
5,688  
  
–  

–  
–  
  
–  

35,511  

–  

–  

–  

–  

–  

–  

–  

–  

35,511  

211,929  
13,096  
57,152  
–  

424,715  
1,021  
–  

35,600  
22,073  
1,390  
–  

129,505  
6,585  
–  

7,743  
10,994  
1,353  
–  

82,091  
298  
–  

1,055  
7,097  
656  
110  

313  
5,244  
958  
–  

77,603  
156  
–  

94,361  
178  
–  

946  
20,135  
892  
–  

71,198  
1,046  
–  

–  
34,226  
2,378  
1,881  

142,738  
1,073  
–  

–  
40,626  
11,411  
8,034  

92,083  
12,357  
–  

16,361  
–  
1,117  
–  

273,947  
153,491  
77,307  
10,025  

662,673  
9,363  
108,175  

1,776,967  
32,077  
108,175  

Total assets  

$ 501,687   $ 136,030   $107,515   $ 69,556   $ 65,856   $ 187,010   $ 438,382   $

212,315   $ 198,868   $ 1,917,219  

Total liabilities and equity  

$ 425,736   $ 136,090   $ 82,389   $ 77,759   $ 94,539   $

72,244   $ 143,811   $

104,440   $ 780,211   $ 1,917,219  

Off-balance sheet items  
Financial guarantees  
Commitments to extend credit  
Other credit-related commitments  
Other commitments  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

$

545   $

7,016  
1,934  
24  

2,211   $ 3,745   $ 3,274   $ 3,446   $
6,879  
1,135  
11  

17,133  
1,469  
16  

21,094  
1,448  
16  

14,184  
1,674  
16  

1,415   $

4,550   $

1,068   $

49,135  
541  
60  

193,990  
520  
136  

19,269  
85  
187  

4,516  
90,821  
849  

  
37   $

  
20,291  
333,216  
99,627  
1,315  

Total off-balance sheet items  

$

9,519   $ 10,236   $ 19,619   $ 25,832   $ 22,064   $

51,151   $ 199,196   $

20,609   $ 96,223   $

454,449  

(1) 

Trading debt securities classified as FVTPL have been included in the less than 1 month category as there is no expectation to hold these assets to their contractual 
maturity. 

(2)  Open reverse repo and repo contracts, which have no set maturity date and are typically short term, have been included in the with no specific maturity category. 
(3) 

A major portion of relationship-based deposits are repayable on demand or at short notice on a contractual basis while, in practice, these customer balances form a core 
base for our operations and liquidity needs, as explained in the preceding Deposit and funding profile section. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

91 

  

As at October 31, 2021  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Assets  
Cash and deposits with banks  
Securities  

Trading (1)  
Investment, net of applicable  

allowance  

Assets purchased under reverse  
repurchase agreements and  
securities borrowed (2)  

Loans, net of applicable allowance  
Other  

Customers’ liability  

under acceptances  

Derivatives  
Other financial assets  

Liabilities and equity  
Deposits (3)  

Unsecured borrowing  
Secured borrowing  
Covered bonds  

Other  

Acceptances  
Obligations related to securities  

Obligations related to assets sold  
under repurchase agreements  
and securities loaned (2)  

Derivatives  
Other financial liabilities  

Subordinated debentures  

Total financial liabilities  
Other non-financial liabilities  
Equity  

Less than  
1 month  

1 to 3  
months  

3 to 6  
months  

6 to 9  
months  

9 to 12  
months  

1 year  
to 2 years  

2 years  
to 5 years  

5 years  
and greater  

  

$ 190,995   $

  
67,655  

  
2   $
  
46  

  
1   $
  
87  

  
–   $
  
41  

  
–   $
  
6  

  
–   $
  
20  

  
–   $
  
169  

  
–   $
  
9,845  

  

2,486   $

  
61,371  

Total  

  
193,484  
  
139,240  

With no  
specific  
maturity  

7,220  

4,811  

5,546  

5,832  

5,514  

22,368  

31,393  

62,289  

511  

145,484  

104,301  
28,517  
  

12,654  
5,325  
33,149  

89,612  
21,630  
  

7,209  
10,788  
1,523  

51,664  
26,094  
  

22,982  
31,910  
  

16,987  
26,921  
  

98  
139,050  
  

–  
298,659  
  

5  
4,318  
1,942  

–  
4,334  
145  

–  
3,005  
135  

5  
10,139  
270  

–  
17,890  
277  

–  
62,215  
  

–  
39,733  
2,044  

22,259  
82,579  
  

(75)  
9  
3,351  

307,903  
717,575  
  

19,798  
95,541  
42,836  

Total financial assets  
Other non-financial assets  

449,816  
6,079  

135,621  
1,681  

89,657  
164  

65,244  
217  

52,568  
185  

171,950  
1,957  

348,388  
2,377  

176,126  
5,898  

172,491  
25,904  

1,661,861  
44,462  

Total assets  

$ 455,895   $ 137,302   $ 89,821   $ 65,461   $ 52,753   $ 173,907   $ 350,765   $

182,024   $ 198,395   $ 1,706,323  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

$ 82,183   $ 44,058   $ 56,519   $ 36,342   $ 35,792   $ 30,625   $ 45,745   $
4,362  
2,693  
  
2  

15,040  
18,321  
  
–  

2,442  
1  
  
12,653  

2,804  
1,878  
  
–  

9,557  
5,350  
  
5  

4,244  
848  
  
7,207  

7,543  
–  
  
5  

  
  

  
  

  
  
18,320   $ 661,924   $ 1,011,508  
52,110  
37,213  
  
19,873  

6,118  
8,122  
  
–  

–  
–  
  
1  

sold short  

37,841  

–  

–  

–  

–  

–  

–  

–  

–  

37,841  

168,763  
5,456  
33,489  
–  

342,828  
1,663  
–  

62,338  
9,903  
1,299  
–  

129,897  
6,907  
–  

5,610  
4,938  
1,048  
–  

75,663  
434  
–  

4,742  
3,747  
439  
–  

52,327  
290  
–  

848  
2,723  
373  
188  

44,606  
155  
–  

668  
9,211  
1,000  
110  

56,526  
1,108  
–  

–  
18,727  
2,115  
1,912  

101,860  
1,172  
–  

–  
36,733  
10,226  
7,383  

86,902  
13,360  
–  

19,232  
1  
795  
–  

681,953  
9,910  
98,762  

262,201  
91,439  
50,784  
9,593  

1,572,562  
34,999  
98,762  

Total liabilities and equity  

$ 344,491   $ 136,804   $ 76,097   $ 52,617   $ 44,761   $ 57,634   $ 103,032   $

100,262   $ 790,625   $ 1,706,323  

Off-balance sheet items  
Financial guarantees  
Commitments to extend credit  
Other credit-related commitments  
Other commitments  

  
387   $

$

5,964  
966  
101  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

1,950   $ 2,999   $ 2,928   $ 2,206   $
5,538  
1,064  
11  

12,024  
1,376  
21  

16,231  
1,536  
21  

11,400  
1,569  
20  

1,829   $

3,326   $

1,181   $

56,688  
370  
64  

160,789  
726  
144  

16,733  
38  
278  

4,544  
99,815  
618  

  
61   $

  
16,867  
289,911  
107,460  
1,278  

Total off-balance sheet items  

$

7,418   $

8,563   $ 15,988   $ 20,716   $ 15,627   $ 58,951   $ 164,985   $

18,230   $ 105,038   $

415,516  

(1) 

Trading debt securities classified as FVTPL have been included in the less than 1 month category as there is no expectation to hold these assets to their contractual 
maturity. 

(2)  Open reverse repo and repo contracts, which have no set maturity date and are typically short term, have been included in the with no specific maturity category. 
(3) 

A major portion of relationship-based deposits are repayable on demand or at short notice on a contractual basis while, in practice, these customer balances form a core 
base for our operations and liquidity needs, as explained in the preceding Deposit and funding profile section. 

92

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Contractual maturities of financial liabilities and off-balance sheet items – undiscounted basis 
The following tables provide remaining contractual maturity analysis of our financial liabilities and off-balance sheet items. The 
amounts disclosed in the following table are the contractual undiscounted cash flows of all financial liabilities (e.g., par value or 
amount payable upon maturity). The amounts do not reconcile directly with those in our consolidated balance sheets as the table 
incorporates only cash flows relating to payments on maturity and do not recognize premiums, discounts or mark-to-market 
adjustments recognized in the instruments’ carrying values as at the balance sheet date. Financial liabilities are based upon the 
earliest period in which they are required to be paid. For off-balance sheet items, the undiscounted cash flows potentially payable 
under financial guarantees and commitments to extend credit are classified on the basis of the earliest date they can be called. 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Contractual maturities of financial liabilities and off-balance sheet items – undiscounted basis*  

Table 63   

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Financial liabilities  
Deposits (1)  
Other  

Acceptances  
Obligations related to securities sold short  
Obligations related to assets sold under repurchase  

agreements and securities loaned  

Other liabilities  

Lease liabilities  
Subordinated debentures  

Off-balance sheet items  
Financial guarantees (2)  
Other commitments (3)  
Commitments to extend credit (2)  

As at October 31, 2022  

On  
demand  

Within  
1 year  

1 year  
to 2 years  

2 years  
to 5 years  

5 years  
and greater  

Total  

  

  
$ 562,288   $ 463,711   $ 50,169   $106,568   $
  
17,872  
35,395  

  
–  
–  

  
–  
–  

  
–  
–  

  

  

  

  
37,260   $ 1,219,996  
  
17,872  
35,395  

  
–  
–  

16,367  
508  
–  
–  

256,756  
61,420  
654  
110  

948  
220  
630  
–  

–  
709  
1,609  
1,884  

–  
9,191  
2,217  
8,042  

274,071  
72,048  
5,110  
10,036  

579,163  

835,918  

51,967   110,770  

56,710  

1,634,528  

  

$

20,289   $

  
2   $

–  
284,606  

73  
48,573  

304,895  

48,648  

  
–   $

60  
1  

61  

  
–   $

136  
36  

172  

  
–   $

187  
–  

187  

  
20,291  
456  
333,216  

353,963  

Total financial liabilities and off-balance sheet items   $ 884,058   $ 884,566   $ 52,028   $110,942   $

56,897   $ 1,988,491  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Financial liabilities  
Deposits (1)  
Other  

Acceptances  
Obligations related to securities sold short  
Obligations related to assets sold under repurchase  

agreements and securities loaned  

Other liabilities  

Lease liabilities  
Subordinated debentures  

Off-balance sheet items  
Financial guarantees (2)  
Other commitments (3)  
Commitments to extend credit (2)  

  
As at October 31, 2021  

On  
demand  

Within  
1 year  

1 year  
to 2 years  

2 years  
to 5 years  

5 years  
and greater  

  

  
$ 576,161   $ 367,389   $ 44,951   $ 78,071   $
  
19,867  
37,462  

  
5  
–  

  
1  
–  

  
–  
–  

  

  

33,063   $

  

  
–  
–  

19,234  
620  
–  
–  

242,314  
35,984  
631  
188  

669  
384  
582  
110  

–  
544  
1,522  
1,916  

–  
7,873  
2,342  
7,392  

596,016  

703,835  

46,701  

82,053  

50,670  

1,479,275  

  

$

16,867   $

  
–   $

–  
248,594  

81  
41,238  

265,461  

41,319  

  
–   $

82  
77  

159  

  
–   $

209  
2  

211  

  
–   $

344  
–  

344  

Total  

  
1,099,635  
  
19,873  
37,462  

262,217  
45,405  
5,077  
9,606  

  
16,867  
716  
289,911  

307,494  

Total financial liabilities and off-balance sheet items   $ 861,477   $ 745,154   $ 46,860   $ 82,264   $

51,014   $

1,786,769  

* 
(1) 

This table represents an integral part of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
A major portion of relationship-based deposits are repayable on demand or at short notice on a contractual basis while, in practice, these customer balances form a core 
base for our operations and liquidity needs, as explained in the preceding Deposit and funding profile. 

(2)  We believe that it is highly unlikely that all or substantially all of these guarantees and commitments will be drawn or settled within one year, and contracts may expire 

without being drawn or settled. The management of the liquidity risk associated with potential extensions of funds is outlined in the preceding Risk measurement section. 
Includes commitments related to short-term and low-dollar value leases, leases not yet commenced, and lease payments related to non-recoverable tax. 

(3) 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

93 

Insurance risk  

Insurance risk refers to the potential financial loss that may arise where the amount, timing and/or frequency of benefit and/or 
premium payments under insurance and reinsurance contracts are different than expected. Insurance risk is distinct from those 
risks covered by other parts of our risk management framework (e.g., credit, market and operational risk) where those risks are 
ancillary to, or accompany, the risk transfer. The five insurance sub-risks are: morbidity, mortality, longevity, policyholder 
behaviour (lapse), and travel risk. 

Our Insurance Risk Management Framework provides an overview of our processes and tools for identifying, assessing, 
managing, mitigating and reporting on the insurance risks that face the organization. These are also supported by our robust 
three lines of defence governance structure, which is consistent with our Enterprise Risk Management Framework. 

Operational/regulatory compliance risk drivers  

Operational risk  

Operational risk is the risk of loss or harm resulting from people, inadequate or failed internal processes, controls and systems 
or from external events. Operational risk is inherent in all of our activities and third-party activities and failure to manage 
operational risk can result in direct or indirect financial loss, reputational impact or regulatory scrutiny and proceedings in the 
various jurisdictions where we operate. 

Our management of operational risk follows the three lines of defence governance model, encompassing the organizational roles 
and responsibilities for a coordinated enterprise-wide approach. For further details, refer to the Risk management – Enterprise 
risk management section. 

(cid:129)

Operational risk framework 
We have an Enterprise Operational Risk Framework which sets out the processes to identify, assess, monitor, measure, report 
and communicate on operational risk. The processes are established through the following: 
(cid:129)

Risk identification and assessment tools, including the collection and analysis of risk event data, help risk owners 
understand and proactively manage operational risk exposures. Risk assessments are intended to ensure alignment 
between risk exposures and efforts to manage them. Management uses outputs of these tools to make informed risk 
decisions. 
Risk monitoring tools alert management to changes in the operational risk profile. When paired with escalation and 
monitoring triggers, risk monitoring tools can identify risk trends, warn management of risk levels that approach or exceed 
defined limits, as well as prompt actions and mitigation plans to be undertaken. 
Risk capital measurement is designed to provide credible estimation of potential risk exposure, including surfacing risk 
vulnerabilities, and informs strategic and capital planning decisions, which are ultimately intended to ensure that the bank is 
sufficiently resilient to withstand operational risk losses both in normal times and under stress situations. 
Risk reporting and communication processes seek to ensure that relevant operational risk information is made available to 
management in a timely manner to support risk-informed business decisions. 

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

Conclusions from our operational risk programs enable learning based on what has occurred, insights into whether it could 
happen elsewhere in the organization, and what controls we need to amend or implement. These conclusions support the 
articulation of our operational risk appetite and are used to inform the overall level of operational risk exposure which thereby 
defines our operational risk profile. This profile includes significant operational risk exposures, potential new and emerging 
exposures and trends, and overall conclusions on the control environment and risk outlook. 

We consider the potential risks and rewards of our decisions to strike a balance between accepting potential losses versus 

incurring costs of mitigation, the expression of which is in the form of our operational risk appetite. Our operational risk appetite 
is established at the Board level and cascaded throughout each of our business segments. We proactively identify and 
investigate corporate insurance opportunities to mitigate and reduce potential future impacts of operational risk. 

Management reports have been implemented at various levels to support proactive management of operational risk and 

transparency of risk exposures. These reports are provided to senior management on a regular basis and provide detail on the 
main drivers of the risk status and trend for each of our business segments and the bank overall. In addition, changes to the 
operational risk profile that are not aligned to our business strategy or operational risk appetite are identified and discussed at 
GRC and the Risk Committee of the Board. 

94

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Our operations expose us to many different operational risks, which may adversely affect our businesses and financial 

results. The following list is not exhaustive, as other factors could also adversely affect our results. 

 Operational risk  

Management strategy  

Information technology  
and cybersecurity risk  

Information technology risk is the risk associated with the use, ownership, operation, and adoption  
of information systems that can result in business interruptions, client service disruptions and loss  
of confidential information causing financial loss, reputational damage and regulatory fines and  
penalties. We maintain a risk driven program to address the risks following our operational risk  
framework supported by a global team of technology risk management experts.  

Information management  
and privacy risk  

Money laundering and  
Terrorist financing risk  

Third-party risk  

Business continuity risk  

  

  

  

  

  

Cybersecurity risk is the risk to the business associated with cyber-attacks initiated to disrupt or  
disable our operations or to expose or damage data. We have a dedicated team of technology and  
cybersecurity professionals that manage a comprehensive program to help protect the  
organization against breaches and other incidents by ensuring appropriate security and  
operational controls are in place. We continue to strengthen our cyber-control framework and to  
improve our resilience and cybersecurity capabilities including 24 hour monitoring, cyber  
intelligence analysis of internal and external threats and alerting of potentially suspicious security  
events and incidents. Throughout the year, we continued to invest in our cybersecurity program,  
and multiple scenarios, assessments and simulations were conducted to test our resiliency  
strategy.  

Information management risk is the risk of failing to manage information appropriately through its  
lifecycle due to inadequate processes, controls and technology resulting in legal and regulatory  
consequences, reputational damage and/or financial loss. We have made substantial investments  
in the Enterprise Chief Data Office (CDO) and functional and regional data management and data  
governance units to promote awareness of and effectively manage information management risk.  
Managing information management risk is fundamental to realizing our Data Vision, which is to  
become a data-driven organization that uses data effectively and efficiently to improve client  
experience and decision-making. Privacy risk is the risk of improper creation or collection, use,  
disclosure, retention or destruction of information. The collection, use and sharing of data, as well  
as the management and governance of data, are increasingly important as we continue to invest in  
digital solutions and innovation, as well as expanding our business activities. This is also reflected  
through regulatory developments relating to data privacy. The CDO and the Chief Privacy Office  
partner with cross-functional teams to develop and implement enterprise-wide standards and  
practices that describe how data is used, protected, managed and governed.  

Money laundering and Terrorist financing risk is the risk that our products and services are used to  
facilitate the laundering of proceeds of crime or the financing of terrorist activity. We maintain an  
enterprise-wide program designed to deter, detect and report suspected money laundering and  
terrorist financing activities across our organization, while seeking to ensure compliance with the  
laws and regulations of the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Our Enterprise Financial  
Crimes program is dedicated to the continuous development and maintenance of robust policies,  
guidelines, training, risk-assessment tools and models to enable our employees to manage  
evolving money laundering and terrorist financing risks and regulatory expectations. The  
Enterprise Financial Crimes program is regularly evaluated in an effort to ensure it remains aligned  
with industry standards, best practices and all applicable laws, regulations and guidance. Risks of  
non-compliance include enforcement actions, criminal prosecutions and reputational damage.  

Third-party risk is the risk of failure to effectively manage third parties which may expose us to  
service disruptions, regulatory action, financial loss, litigation or reputational damage. We have a  
risk-based enterprise-wide program designed to provide oversight for third-party relationships  
that enables us to respond effectively to events that can cause service disruptions, financial loss  
or various other risks that could impact us. Our approach to third-party risk mitigation is outlined  
in policies and standards that establish the minimum requirements for identifying and managing  
risks throughout the engagement with a third-party, while ensuring compliance with global  
regulatory expectations. We monitor third-party providers that we consider critical to our  
operations for any impact on their ability to deliver services to us, including vendors of our third-
party providers.  

Business continuity risk is the risk of being unable to maintain, continue or restore essential  
business operations during and/or after an event that prevents us from conducting business in the  
normal course. Exposure to disruptive operational events interrupts the continuity of our business  
operations and could negatively impact our financial results, reputation, client outcomes and/or  
result in harm to our employees. These operational events could result from the impact of severe  
weather, pandemics, failed processes, technology failures or cyber threats. Our risk-based  
enterprise-wide business continuity management program considers multiple scenarios to  
address the consequences of a disruption and its effects on the availability of our people,  
processes, facilities, technology, and third-party arrangements. Our approach to business  
continuity management is outlined in policies and standards embedded across the organization  
and the related risks are regularly measured, monitored, reported and integrated in our  
operational risk management and control framework.  

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

95 

Operational risk capital 
Requirements for operational risk capital are determined in accordance with OSFI issued guidelines. Currently, our operational 
risk capital is assessed using the Standardized Approach (TSA) which is a formula-based calculation predicated on gross income. 
Upon implementation of final Basel III reforms, OSFI will require deposit-taking institutions to adopt a new Standardized 
Approach (SA) in Q2 2023 for measurement of operational risk capital. The SA methodology is based on the Business Indicator 
Component (BIC), which is a financial statement-based proxy for operational risk, and the Internal Loss Multiplier, a scaling 
factor that is based on the historical internal loss average relative to the BIC. Once implemented, SA will replace TSA. For further 
details on operational risk capital, refer to the Capital management section. 

Operational risk loss events 
As at October 31, 2022, our operational risk losses remain within our risk appetite. For further details on our contingencies, 
including litigation, refer to Notes 24 and 25 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Culture and conduct risk 
Our values set the tone of our organizational culture and translate into desired behaviours as articulated in our Code of Conduct 
and leadership model. We define conduct as the manifestation of culture through the behaviours, judgment, decisions, and 
actions of the organization and its employees. Our organizational direction establishes the expectation of good conduct 
outcomes as the operating norm for the organization, all employees, and third-party service providers operating on our behalf to 
drive positive outcomes for our clients, employees, stakeholders, financial markets and our reputation. We hold ourselves to the 
highest standards of conduct to build the trust of our clients, investors, colleagues and community. The desired outcomes from 
effective culture and conduct practices align with our purpose and values and support our risk appetite statements. 

Risk culture is a subset of our overall culture that influences how, individually and collectively, we take and manage risks. 
Our risk culture helps us identify and understand risks, openly discuss risks, and act on the organization’s current and perceived 
future risks. Our risk culture practices are grounded in our existing risk management and human resource disciplines and 
protocols. When combined with the elements of effective leadership and values, these practices provide a base from which the 
resulting risk culture and conduct can be assessed, monitored, sustained and subjected to ongoing enhancement. 

Our Board-approved Enterprise Culture and Conduct Risks Framework provides organizational direction and describes our 

approach to a set of related topics applicable to all risk categories such as fair outcomes for clients and other stakeholders, 
culture, including accountability and risk culture, conduct risk, sales conduct and client practices, and misconduct. 

On a regular basis, management communicates behavioural expectations to our employees with an emphasis on conduct 

and values. Our leadership model also supports and encourages effective challenge between the businesses and control 
functions. These behavioural expectations are supported by tools and resources which are designed to help employees live our 
values, report misconduct and raise concerns, including those that might have ethical implications. We are committed to 
fostering an environment where employees feel safe to speak up without retaliation. Employees have the ability to report 
matters through a global anonymous Conduct Hotline. In addition, our Code of Conduct outlines an employee’s responsibility to 
be truthful, respect others, and comply with laws, regulations and our policies. Anyone who breaches or fails to report an actual 
or possible breach of the Code of Conduct is subject to corrective or disciplinary action. This can range from reprimands and 
impacts on performance ratings and compensation, to termination of employment relationships with the organization. Internal 
audits, including behavioural science reviews with recommendations are also conducted to better understand and enhance 
employee attitudes and behaviours as they relate to risk management. 

Sets expected

Drives

Outcomes for
Stakeholders:
Clients
Employees
Financial Markets
Regulators
Our Reputation
Shareholders

Culture Factors
Inﬂuential to Managing
Conduct Risk

Risk Awareness
Tone from Above
Accountability
Speaking Up
Incentives

Organizational Direction
articulated through:
Values
Leadership Model
Code of Conduct
Risk Appetite
Risk Principles

Shapes

Inﬂuences

Individual &
Collective Conduct
exhibited through:
Behaviours
Judgment
Decisions
Actions 

Apply lessons learned

 

Regulatory compliance risk  

Regulatory compliance risk is the risk of potential non-conformance with laws, rules, regulations and prescribed practices in any 
jurisdiction in which we operate. Issues regarding compliance with laws and regulations can arise in a number of areas in large 
complex financial institutions, such as ourselves, and are often the result of inadequate or failed internal processes, controls, 
people or systems. We currently are, and may be at any given time, subject to a number of legal and regulatory proceedings and 
subject to numerous governmental and regulatory examinations, investigations and other inquiries. 

96

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Laws and regulations are in place to protect the financial and other interests of our clients, investors and the public. As a 
large-scale global financial institution, we are subject to numerous laws and extensive and evolving regulation by governmental 
agencies, supervisory authorities and self-regulatory organizations in Canada, the U.S., the U.K., Europe and other jurisdictions in 
which we operate. Such regulation continues to become increasingly extensive and complex. In addition, regulatory scrutiny and 
expectations in Canada, the U.S., the U.K., Europe and other jurisdictions for large financial institutions with respect to, among 
other things, governance, risk management practices and controls, and conduct, as well as the enforcement of regulatory 
compliance matters, has intensified. Failure to comply with these regulatory requirements and expectations or to resolve any 
identified deficiencies could result in increased regulatory oversight and restrictions. Resolution of such matters can also result 
in the payment of substantial penalties, agreements with respect to future operation of our business, actions with respect to 
relevant personnel, admission of wrongdoing, and guilty pleas with respect to criminal charges, which may in turn prohibit us 
from conducting certain types of business absent regulatory relief. 

Operating in this increasingly complex regulatory environment and intense regulatory enforcement environment, we are and 

have been subject to a variety of legal proceedings, including civil claims and lawsuits, criminal charges, regulatory scrutiny, 
examinations and proceedings, investigations, audits and requests for information by various governmental regulatory agencies 
and law enforcement authorities in various jurisdictions, and we anticipate that our ongoing business activities will give rise to 
such matters in the future. The global scope of our operations also means that a single issue may give rise to overlapping 
regulatory investigations, regulatory proceedings and or civil litigation claims in different jurisdictions. RBC can be subject to 
such proceedings due to alleged violations of law or, if determined by regulators, allegedly inadequate policies, procedures, 
controls or remediation of deficiencies. Changes to laws, including tax laws, regulations or regulatory policies, as well as the 
changes in how they are interpreted, implemented or enforced, could adversely affect us, for example, by lowering barriers to 
entry in the businesses in which we operate, increasing our costs of compliance, or limiting our activities and ability to execute 
our strategic plans. In addition, the severity of the remedies sought in legal and regulatory proceedings to which RBC is subject 
have increased. Further, there is no assurance that we always will be, or be deemed to be, in compliance with laws, regulations or 
regulatory policies or expectations. Accordingly, it is possible that we could receive a judicial or regulatory enforcement 
judgment or decision that results in significant fines, damages, penalties, and other costs or injunctions, criminal convictions, or 
loss of licenses or registrations that would damage our reputation, and negatively impact our earnings and ability to conduct 
some of our businesses. We are also subject to litigation arising in the ordinary course of our business and the adverse 
resolution of any litigation could have a significant adverse effect on our results or could give rise to significant reputational 
damage, which in turn could impact our future business prospects. 

Our Regulatory Compliance Management Framework outlines how we manage and mitigate the regulatory compliance risks 

associated with failing to comply with, or adapt to, current and changing laws and regulations in the jurisdictions in which we 
operate. 

Regulatory compliance risk includes the regulatory risks associated with financial crimes (which include, but are not limited 

to, money laundering, bribery, and sanctions), privacy, market conduct, consumer protection, business conduct, as well as 
prudential and other generally applicable non-financial requirements. Specific compliance policies, procedures and supporting 
frameworks have been developed to seek to manage regulatory compliance risk. 

Strategic risk drivers  

Strategic risk  

Strategic risk is the risk that the enterprise or particular business areas will make inappropriate strategic choices, or will be 
unable to successfully implement selected strategies or achieve the expected benefits. Business strategy is a major driver of our 
risk appetite and consequently the strategic choices we make in terms of business mix determine how our risk profile changes. 
Responsibility for selecting and successfully implementing business strategies is mandated to the individual heads of each 

business segment. Oversight of strategic risk is the responsibility of the heads of the business segments and their operating 
committees, the Enterprise Strategy & Transformation group, the GE, and the Board. The Enterprise Strategy & Transformation 
group supports the management of strategic risk through the strategic planning process, articulated within our Enterprise 
Strategic Planning Policy, ensuring alignment across our business, financial, capital and risk planning. 

Our annual business portfolio review and project approval request processes help to identify and mitigate strategic risk by 
seeking to ensure that strategies for new initiatives, lines of business, and the enterprise as a whole align with our risk appetite 
and risk posture. GRM provides oversight of strategic risk by providing independent reviews of these processes, establishing 
enterprise risk frameworks, and independently monitoring and reporting on the level of risk established against our risk appetite 
metrics in accordance with the three lines of defence governance model. 

For details on the key strategic priorities for our business segments, refer to the Business segment results section. 

Reputation risk  

Reputation risk is the risk of an adverse impact on stakeholders’ perception of the bank due to i) the actions or inactions of the 
bank, its employees, third-party service providers, or clients, ii) the perceived misalignment of these actions or inactions with 
stakeholder expectations of the bank, or iii) negative public sentiment towards a global or industry issue. Our reputation is 
rooted in the perception of our stakeholders, and the trust and loyalty they place in us is core to our Purpose of helping clients 
thrive and communities prosper. A strong and trustworthy reputation will generally strengthen our market position, reduce the 
cost of capital, increase shareholder value, strengthen our resiliency, and help attract and retain top talent. Conversely, damage 
to our reputation can result in reduced share price and market capitalization, increased cost of capital, loss of strategic 
flexibility, inability to enter or expand into markets, loss of client loyalty and business, regulatory fines and penalties, restrictive 
agreements with regulators or prosecutors, or criminal prosecutions. The sources of reputation risk are widespread. Reputation 
risk is a transverse risk which can manifest as an outcome of other risk types including but not limited to credit, regulatory, legal, 
operational, and environmental and social risks. We can also experience reputation risk from a failure to maintain an effective 
control environment, exhibit good conduct and maintain appropriate culture practices. 

Managing our reputation risk is an integral part of our organizational culture and our overall enterprise risk management 

approach, as well as a priority for employees and our Board. Our Board-approved Reputation Risk Management Framework 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

97 

provides an overview of our approach to identify, assess, manage, monitor and report on reputation risk. This framework outlines 
governance authorities, roles and responsibilities, and controls and mechanisms to manage our reputation risk, including our 
culture of integrity, compliance with our Code of Conduct and operating within our risk appetite. 

Our governance of reputation risk aims to be holistic and provides an integrated view of potential reputation issues across 

the organization. This governance structure is designed to ensure that ownership and accountability for reputation risk are 
understood across the enterprise, both proactive and reactive reputation risk decisions are escalated to senior management for 
review and evaluation, and reporting on reputation risk is comprehensive and integrated. 

Legal and regulatory environment risk  

Legal and regulatory environment risk is the risk that new or modified laws and regulations, and the interpretation or application 
of laws and regulations, will negatively impact the way in which we operate, both in Canada and in the other jurisdictions in 
which we conduct business. The full impact of some of these changes on our business will not be known until final rules are 
implemented and market practices have developed in response. We continue to respond to these and other developments and 
are working to minimize any potential adverse business or economic impact. The following provides a high-level summary of 
some of the key regulatory changes that have potential to increase or decrease our costs, impact our profitability and increase 
the complexity of our operations. 

Global uncertainty 
Significant uncertainty about inflationary and trade pressures, geopolitical tensions and supply chain disruptions all pose risks 
to the global economic outlook. In October 2022, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) projected global growth of 3.2% in 
calendar 2022 which remains unchanged from its July forecast. The October 2022 forecast is down from 4.9% in October 2021 and 
reflects the ongoing economic effects of inflationary pressures and tightening monetary policy, a worse-than-anticipated 
slowdown in China resulting from COVID-19 containment measures, and the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine. While 
the outcome of the conflict between Russia and Ukraine remains uncertain, our exposure to Russia and Ukraine is extremely 
limited, as we do not have operations in these countries, consistent with our strategy and risk appetite. Our diversified business 
model, as well as our product and geographic diversification, continue to help mitigate the risks posed by global uncertainty. 

Government of Canada Budget 2022 
On April 7, 2022, the Government of Canada presented its 2022 budget, which included measures focused on ensuring banking 
and life insurers’ groups help pay a portion of the costs of the Canadian federal government’s COVID-19 pandemic response. On 
November 22, 2022, Bill C-32, Fall Economic Statement Implementation Act, 2022 (the Bill) received second reading in the House 
of Commons. The Bill includes a Canada Recovery Dividend (CRD) and a permanent increase in the corporate income tax rate. 
The CRD is a one-time 15% tax for 2022 determined based on the average taxable income above $1 billion for taxation years 2020 
and 2021 and payable in equal installments over five years. The permanent increase in the corporate income tax rate is 1.5% on 
taxable income above $100 million and would apply to taxation years that end after April 7, 2022. 

The Bill is not yet substantively enacted and timing of enactment remains uncertain. Based on the draft legislation, which 
remains subject to amendments prior to enactment, the CRD is expected to reduce net income by approximately $1 billion and 
other comprehensive income by approximately $0.1 billion when substantively enacted. The CRD is also expected to reduce our 
CET1 ratio by approximately 20 bps. 

Climate-related regulatory activity 
Climate change regulations, frameworks, and guidance that apply to banks, insurers and asset managers are rapidly evolving. 
We continue to monitor the development of applicable laws in this area and the evolution of disclosure requirements for public 
issuers. In Canada this includes OSFI’s Draft Guideline B-15 Climate Risk Management, which encompasses both climate risk 
management guidance and disclosure requirements that, if approved, would apply to RBC for fiscal 2023 at the earliest, and the 
Canadian Securities Administrators’ proposed National Instrument 51-107 on disclosure of climate-related matters which would 
introduce climate-related disclosure requirements for Canadian reporting issuers. In the U.S., the SEC has proposed rule changes 
which would require many registrants to include certain climate-related disclosures in their regulatory filings, including the 
financial statements. Internationally, the European Parliament recently approved the Corporate Sustainability Reporting 
Directive which will require disclosure under the European Sustainability Reporting Standards, and the International 
Sustainability Standards Board has also proposed standards for climate-related disclosures and general sustainability related 
disclosures. 

Canadian Housing Market and Consumer Debt 
In June 2022, OSFI released a new Advisory - Clarification on the Treatment of Innovative Real Estate Secured Lending Products 
under Guideline B-20 (the Advisory). The Advisory complements existing expectations under Guideline B-20 – Residential 
Mortgage Underwriting Practices and Procedures, which articulates OSFI’s expectations regarding underwriting practices and 
procedures for reverse residential mortgages, residential mortgages with shared equity features and combined loan plans 
(CLPs). We do not originate reverse residential mortgages or residential mortgages with shared equity features, but we do 
originate CLPs through our RBC Homeline Plan® products. The Advisory is not expected to have an effect on how most borrowers 
with CLPs use their products. 

The Advisory will come into effect for us on October 31, 2023. New CLPs originated after this date will need to meet the new 

requirements. CLPs originated before October 31, 2023 are not subject to the new requirements unless certain contractual 
changes are made that would trigger application of the requirements. We have assessed the requirements and initiated a project 
to meet the requirements by the effective date. 

Interest rate benchmark reform 
On May 16, 2022, Refinitiv Benchmark Services (UK) Limited (RBSL), the administrator of the Canadian Dollar Offered Rate 
(CDOR), announced that the calculation and publication of all remaining tenors of CDOR will permanently cease after June 28, 
2024. Concurrently, OSFI published their expectation that federally regulated financial institutions (FRFIs) transition all new 
derivatives and securities to an alternative benchmark rate by June 30, 2023, with no new CDOR exposure after that date, with 

98

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

limited exceptions for risk management requirements. Furthermore, OSFI also expects all loan agreements referencing CDOR to 
be transitioned by June 28, 2024. The cessation of CDOR will be managed within our enterprise-wide interest rate benchmark 
reform program. 

For further details, refer to Note 2 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

U.S. regulatory initiatives 
On September 29, 2022, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) issued a final rule 
implementing the beneficial ownership information reporting requirements of the Corporate Transparency Act, which was part of 
the Anti- Money Laundering Act of 2020 (AMLA). The AMLA made significant revisions to the U.S.’s anti-money laundering/
anti-terrorist financing compliance framework, including by requiring FinCEN to issue the final rule. The final rule implements 
sweeping beneficial ownership disclosure requirements applicable to U.S. companies (excluding trusts) and foreign companies 
doing business in the U.S., in each case subject to certain exceptions. The final rule goes into effect January 1, 2024. As part of 
these broad changes to the U.S. AML regulatory regime, FinCEN has stated that it plans to update its Customer Due Diligence 
rule, which requires covered financial institutions to identify and verify the beneficial owners of legal entity customers. We are 
currently assessing the impact of the final rule and do not anticipate any issues in complying with the requirements. 

Technology and cyber risk management 
In July 2022, OSFI released final Guideline B-13 – Technology and Cyber Risk Management, which sets out expectations for the 
sound management of technology and cyber risk for FRFIs. 

This guideline will be effective on January 1, 2024. We have assessed the requirements and do not anticipate any issues in 

complying with the requirements by the effective date. 

Privacy 
In June 2022, the Canadian government released Bill C-27, the Digital Charter Implementation Act, 2022, with principles focused 
on strengthening consumer privacy protection in Canada. The Bill introduced three new federal Acts: the Consumer Privacy 
Protection Act, the Personal Information and Data Protection Tribunal Act, and the Artificial Intelligence and Data Act. These new 
Acts aim to strengthen Canada’s data privacy framework and create new regulations for responsible development and use of AI. 

The Consumer Privacy Protection Act is a private sector law that will repeal and replace the current Personal Information 

Protection and Electronic Documents Act. The Personal Information and Data Protection Tribunal Act will establish an 
administrative tribunal to review decisions and impose penalties, and the Artificial Intelligence and Data Act will create a 
risk-based approach to regulating AI systems. 

While it remains uncertain when and if Bill C-27 will be enacted, this new legislation could result in significant reforms that 

may impact our processes and privacy risk management practices. Our Global Privacy Program is responsible for overseeing the 
implementation of these evolving privacy principles in our organization. 

For further details on regulatory capital and related requirements, refer to the risk and Capital management sections of this 

2022 Annual Report. 

Competitive risk  

Competitive risk is the risk of an inability to build or maintain a sustainable competitive advantage in a given market or markets, 
and includes the potential for loss of market share due to competitors offering superior products and services. Competitive risk 
can arise within or outside the financial sector, from traditional or non-traditional competitors, domestically or globally. There is 
intense competition for clients among financial services companies in the markets in which we operate. Client loyalty and 
retention can be influenced by a number of factors, including new technology used or services offered by our competitors, 
relative service levels and prices, product and service attributes, our reputation, actions taken by our competitors, and 
adherence with competition and anti-trust laws. Other companies, such as insurance companies and non-financial companies, as 
well as new technological applications, are increasingly offering services traditionally provided by banks. This competition could 
also reduce our revenue which could adversely affect our results. 

We identify and assess competitive risks as part of our overall risk management process. Our products and services are 
regularly benchmarked against existing and potential competitors. In addition, we regularly conduct risk reviews of our products, 
services, mergers and acquisitions strategy, as well as we seek to ensure adherence to competition and anti-trust laws. Our 
annual strategy-setting process also plays an integral role in managing competitive risk. 

Macroeconomic risk drivers  

Systemic risk  

Systemic risk is the risk that the financial system as a whole, or a major part of it – either in an individual country, a region, or 
globally – is put in real and immediate danger of collapse or serious damage due to an unforeseen event causing a substantive 
shock to the financial system with the likelihood of material damage to the economy, and which would result in financial, 
reputation, legal or other risks for us. 

Systemic risk is considered to be the least controllable risk facing us, leading to increased vulnerabilities as experienced 

during the 2008 global financial crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic. Our ability to mitigate systemic risk when undertaking 
business activities is limited, other than through collaborative mechanisms between key industry participants, and, as 
appropriate, the public sector and regulators to reduce the frequency and impact of these risks. The two most significant 
measures in mitigating the impact of systemic risk are diversification and stress testing. 

Our diversified business model, portfolios, products, activities and funding sources help mitigate the potential impacts from 
systemic risk as well as having established risk limits to ensure our portfolio is diversified, and concentration risk is reduced and 
remains within our risk appetite. 

Stress testing involves consideration of the simultaneous movements in a number of risk factors. It is used to ensure our 

business strategies and capital planning are robust by measuring the potential impacts of credit, market, liquidity, and 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

99 

operational risks on us, under adverse economic conditions. Our enterprise-wide stress testing program evaluates the potential 
effects of a set of specified changes in risk factors, corresponding to exceptional but plausible adverse economic and financial 
market events. These stress scenarios are evaluated across the organization, and results are integrated to develop an 
enterprise-wide view of the impacts on our financial results and capital requirements. For further details on our stress testing, 
refer to the Enterprise risk management section. 

Our financial results are affected by the business and economic conditions in the geographic regions in which we operate. 

These conditions include consumer saving and spending habits as well as consumer borrowing and repayment patterns, 
business investment, government spending, exchange rates, sovereign debt risks, the level of activity and volatility of the capital 
markets, strength of the economy and inflation. Given the importance of our Canadian and U.S. operations, an economic 
downturn may largely affect our personal and business lending activities and may result in higher provisions for credit losses. 
Deterioration and uncertainty in global capital markets could result in continued high volatility that would impact results in 
Capital Markets, while in Wealth Management weaker market conditions could lead to lower average fee-based client assets and 
transaction volumes. In addition, worsening financial and credit market conditions may adversely affect our ability to access 
capital markets on favourable terms and could negatively affect our liquidity, resulting in increased funding costs and lower 
transaction volumes in Capital Markets and Investor & Treasury Services. 

Our financial results are also sensitive to changes in interest rates. To address growing inflation pressures, major central 
banks started to increase benchmark interest rates in early fiscal 2022 and further increases are expected. While our NIM can 
potentially benefit from rate increases, rising interest rates, coupled with elevated inflation, could increase market volatility and 
reduce asset values, and could adversely impact household and corporate balance sheets. This could lead to credit deterioration 
and impact our financial results, particularly in our Personal & Commercial Banking, Wealth Management, and Capital Markets 
businesses. 

Overview of other risks  

In addition to the risks described in the risk sections, there are other risk factors, described below, which may affect our 
businesses and financial results. The following discussion is not exhaustive as other factors could also adversely affect our 
results. 

Government fiscal, monetary and other policies  

Our businesses and earnings are affected by monetary policies that are adopted by the BoC, the Fed in the U.S., the ECB in the 
European Union (EU), the BoE in the U.K. and monetary authorities in other jurisdictions in which we operate, as well as the fiscal 
policies of the governments of Canada, the U.S., the U.K., Europe and such other jurisdictions. Such policies can also adversely 
affect our clients and counterparties in Canada, the U.S. and internationally, which may increase the risk of default by such 
clients and counterparties. 

Tax risk and transparency  

Tax risk refers to the risk of loss related to unexpected tax liabilities. The tax laws and systems that are applicable to us are 
complex and wide-ranging. As a result, we seek to ensure that any decisions or actions related to tax always reflect our 
assessment of the long-term costs and risks involved, including their impact on our reputation and our relationship with clients, 
shareholders, and regulators. 

Our approach to taxation is grounded in principles which are reflected in our Code of Conduct, is governed by our Enterprise 

Tax Risk Management Policy, and incorporates the fundamentals of our risk drivers. Oversight of our tax policy and the 
management of tax risk is the responsibility of the GE, the CFO and the Senior Vice President, Taxation. We discuss our tax 
strategy with the Audit Committee annually and provide updates on our tax position on a regular basis. 

Our tax strategy is designed to provide transparency and support our business strategy, and is aligned with our corporate 

vision and values. We seek to maximize shareholder value by structuring our businesses in a tax-efficient manner while 
considering reputation risk by being in compliance with all laws and regulations. Our policy requires that we: 

(cid:129)
(cid:129)

(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)

Act with integrity and in a straightforward, open and honest manner in all tax matters; 
Ensure tax strategy is aligned with our business strategy supporting only bona fide transactions with a business purpose 
and economic substance; 
Ensure all intercompany transactions are conducted in accordance with applicable transfer pricing requirements; 
Ensure our full compliance and full disclosure to tax authorities of our statutory obligations; and 
Endeavour to work with the tax authorities to build positive long-term relationships and where disputes occur, address 
them constructively. 

With respect to assessing the needs of our clients, we consider a number of factors including the purpose of the transactions. We 
seek to ensure that we only support bona fide client transactions with a business purpose and economic substance. Should we 
become aware of client transactions that are aimed at evading their tax obligations, we will not proceed with the transactions. 
We operate in 29 countries worldwide. Our activities in these countries are subject to both Canadian and international tax 

legislation and other regulations, and are fully disclosed to the relevant tax authorities. The Taxation group and GRM both 
regularly review the activities of all entities in an effort to ensure compliance with tax requirements and other regulations. 
Given that we operate globally, complex tax legislation and accounting principles have resulted in differing legal 

interpretations between the respective tax authorities we deal with and ourselves, and we are at risk of tax authorities 
disagreeing with prior positions we have taken for tax purposes. When this occurs, we are committed to an open and transparent 
dialogue with the tax authorities to facilitate a quick assessment and prompt resolution of the issues where possible. Failure to 
adequately manage tax risk and resolve issues with tax authorities in a satisfactory manner could adversely impact our results, 
potentially to a material extent in a particular period, and/or significantly impact our reputation. 

100

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Tax contribution 
In 2022, total income and other tax expense, including income taxes in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive 
Income and Changes in Equity, to various levels of governments globally totalled $6 billion (2021 – $8 billion). In Canada, 
total income and other tax expense for the year ended October 31, 2022 to various levels of government totalled $5 billion 
(2021 – $7 billion). 

Income and other tax expense – by category
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 

Income and other tax expense – by geography
(Millions of Canadian dollars)

9,000
8,000
7,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0

9,000
8,000
7,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0

2022

2021

2022

2021

Business taxes

Insurance premium taxes

Property taxes

Other International

U.S.

Canada

  

Capital taxes

Payroll taxes

Income taxes

Value added and
sales taxes

    

For further details on income and other tax expense, refer to the Financial performance section. 

Environmental and social risk (including climate change)  

Environmental and Social (E&S) risk is the potential for an E&S issue associated with us, a client, transaction, product, supplier 
or activity, to have a negative impact on our financial position, operations, legal and regulatory compliance, or reputation. It 
refers to the risk that we face as a result of the manner in which we, a supplier or a client manages E&S issues or relationships 
with stakeholders and communities. 

E&S issues include, but are not limited to, site contamination, waste management, land and resource use, biodiversity, water 

quality and availability, climate change, environmental regulation, human rights (including, but not limited to social and racial 
inequality and Indigenous Peoples’ rights), and community engagement. 

E&S risks, including climate change, are each unique and transverse risks impacting our principal risk types in different ways 
and to varying degrees. While E&S risk manifests itself through credit, reputation, and regulatory compliance risks, the impact of 
E&S risk also extends to our other principal risks, including systemic, competitive, strategic, legal and regulatory environment, 
operational, market, liquidity and insurance risks. 

The following sets out our governance and risk management in respect of environmental and social risks more broadly; see 

the Climate risk section below for additional information specific to climate risk. 

E&S risk – governance 
The Board oversees how we manage our E&S risks, our enterprise approach to E&S risks, and how we conduct our business to 
meet high standards of E&S responsibility. The Committees of the Board have oversight of E&S risks that are specific to their 
respective responsibilities, with the Governance Committee playing a specific oversight and coordination role over ESG matters, 
including certain of our ESG disclosures. For further details on risk governance, refer to the Enterprise risk management – Risk 
governance section and the Climate risk – Governance section. 

Senior management is responsible for managing E&S risks and opportunities, which include climate change, and 

implementing our enterprise strategies for E&S matters. 

E&S risk – risk management 
Roles and responsibilities related to E&S risk management are governed by the three lines of defence governance model and the 
Enterprise Risk Management Framework. 

The E&S Risk team within GRM is responsible for identifying, assessing, measuring, managing, mitigating, monitoring and 
reporting E&S issues that may pose a risk to the bank, and for developing and maintaining policies on a regular basis to manage 
E&S risk. Business segments and functional areas are responsible for incorporating E&S risk management requirements within 
their operations. A bottom-up approach is taken to identifying E&S risk at the client, transaction, and supplier level, as well as 
when evaluating business strategies, acquisitions, projects/initiatives, products, or services. A top-down approach is also taken 
to identifying and monitoring evolving E&S risks by monitoring E&S risk in various businesses, portfolios and geographies. 

Our Enterprise Policy on Environmental (including Climate) and Social Risk (E&S Risk Policy) serves as the foundation for our 

approach to managing E&S risks arising from our activities. It outlines our principles for E&S risk management, as well as the 
minimum requirements on how E&S risks arising from our activities are identified, assessed, measured, managed, mitigated, 
monitored and reported. The E&S Risk Policy also requires that clients operating in industries of elevated environmental risk be 
subjected to an environmental and social review. The E&S Risk Policy is supported by additional policies and procedures on 
E&S risk management for business segments. We also have policy guidelines in place for sensitive sectors and activities, which 
address our financing activities to clients and projects operating in the coal-fired power and coal mining sectors, the Arctic 
ecosystem, the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, and United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) 
World Heritage Sites. 

Our E&S Risk Policy also sets the minimum requirement for how we identify, assess, manage, and mitigate human rights 
issues, and is supported by additional polices and position statements that reflect our approach to managing our businesses in a 
responsible manner. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

101 

Our Code of Conduct establishes standards of desired behaviours that apply to all directors, employees, and contract 
workers of the bank and its subsidiaries. In addition, our principles-based Supplier Code of Conduct articulates our expectations 
with respect to a supplier’s business integrity, responsible business practices and responsible treatment of individuals and the 
environment. 

Our published Human Rights Position Statement sets out our commitment to respect internationally-recognized human 
rights in line with the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. In addition, our Modern Slavery Act 
Statement, which is published annually, sets out the policies and processes that are designed to prevent slavery and human 
trafficking from taking place in our operations and supply chains. 

We are a participant or signatory to various industry principles and initiatives that are designed to help mitigate E&S risk 

within our business activities or advance responsible business practices, including, but not limited to the following: 

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

The bank is a signatory to the Equator Principles (EP), which is a benchmark for determining, assessing and managing 
E&S risks for project finance. We report annually on projects assessed according to the EP framework. 
RBC GAM1, BlueBay Asset Management LLP and Brewin Dolphin Holdings Limited are signatories to the United Nations 
Principles for Responsible Investment (UN PRI) and report annually on their responsible investment activities to the UN PRI. 

Climate risk 
Climate risk is the risk related to the global transition to a net-zero economy (transition risk) and the physical impacts of climate 
change (physical risk), which includes both chronic (longer-term) and acute (event driven) risks. We may be exposed to 
transition risk including through emerging regulatory and legal requirements changing business and consumer sentiments 
towards and the products and services we provide to our clients. Both we and our clients may also be exposed to transition risk 
through technological and societal change and market forces. Additionally, we and our clients may also be vulnerable to physical 
risk including through disruptions to operations and services. 

The following section is informed by the pillars of the Financial Stability Board’s Task Force on Climate-related Financial 
Disclosures (TCFD). 

Climate risk – governance 
The Board provides oversight of the bank’s strategic approach to climate change, which includes how we manage climate-related 
risks and opportunities. The Board approved our updated climate strategy, the RBC Climate Blueprint, which was published in 
February 2022, and engaged with management on a range of climate-related topics including the measurement of financed 
emissions, scenario analysis, and our initial interim emissions reduction targets. The Committees of the Board also engaged with 
management on climate-related issues, which included emerging perspectives in Board oversight of ESG including climate, the 
increased regulatory and stakeholder focus, and further incorporation of climate risks in risk appetite, risk management 
frameworks and enterprise-wide stress testing. 

GE is responsible for implementing the RBC Climate Blueprint. Responsibility for climate is incorporated into our 

management structure and business models throughout the enterprise, and key businesses have an executive with responsibility 
for climate change and are configured to address the sustainable financing, investment and client needs associated with the net-
zero transition as applicable to their business. Since 2021, we have had a Climate Strategy Steering Committee which includes 
executive representation from Capital Markets, Wealth Management, GAM®, Personal & Commercial Banking, GRM and 
Corporate Communications, and a Climate Strategy and Governance team which provides enterprise-wide strategic direction on 
advancing our understanding and developing strategies to address climate-related risks and opportunities for us and our clients.  

1 

RBC GAM includes the following affiliates: BlueBay Asset Management LLP (BlueBay), RBC Global Asset Management Inc. (including Phillips, Hager & North Investment 
Management), RBC Global Asset Management (U.S.) Inc., RBC Global Asset Management (UK) Limited, and RBC Global Asset Management (Asia) Limited, which are 
separate, but affiliated subsidiaries of RBC. 

102

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Climate risk – strategy 
We recognize we have a role to play in accelerating the transition to a net-zero economy and mitigating the risks associated with 
climate change. Our climate strategy is underpinned by our belief that the transition to net-zero should be just, orderly and 
inclusive. The RBC Climate Blueprint outlines our strategic climate priorities, including helping our clients as they transition to a 
net-zero future and holding ourselves accountable to achieve net-zero in our lending by 2050. RBC GAM has an approach to 
climate change that supports the RBC Climate Blueprint and lays out its commitments and actions related to climate change. 

In 2021, we made a commitment to provide $500 billion in sustainable financing by 20252. In October 2022, we published our 

approach and methodology for classifying, tracking, and disclosing progress towards our sustainable finance commitment and to 
support the identification of new growth opportunities for our clients and our business. Financing activities that help to address 
environmental issues are included as one aspect of sustainable finance. Our commitment to sustainable finance therefore allows 
us to build on our support for the growth of the green bond market through our issuance of green bonds under our Sustainable 
Bond Framework. In addition, RBC Europe Limited (RBCEL), a wholly owned subsidiary of the bank, is a member of the Green 
Bond Principles, and RBC reports annually on its green bond underwriting activities, globally. We also provide products, services 
and client solutions across our business segments to help businesses and individuals accelerate their climate goals and 
overcome barriers for adoption. 

RBC is a member of the Net-Zero Banking Alliance (NZBA), which is a global industry-led initiative to accelerate and support 

efforts to address climate change by aligning member banks’ lending and investment portfolios with net-zero emissions by 20503. 
We are also a member of the Partnership for Carbon Accounting Financials (PCAF), which is an industry-led partnership to 
facilitate transparency and enable financial institutions to assess and disclose greenhouse gas emissions of loans and 
investments. As a member of the NZBA, we made a commitment to setting and disclosing interim emissions reduction targets for 
certain of our key high-emitting sectors. In March 2022, we published our initial measurement of financed emissions using the 
PCAF methodology, and in October 2022, in accordance with our NZBA commitment, we published our initial interim emissions 
reduction targets for the oil and gas, power generation and automotive sectors3. 

Our ability to achieve our climate and sustainable finance-related commitments, goals and targets, including those 

discussed above, will depend on the collective efforts and actions across a wide range of stakeholders outside of our control, and 
there can be no assurance that they will be achieved4. 

Climate risk – risk management 
We regard climate risk as a transverse risk, which impacts all of our principal risk types in different ways and to varying degrees, 
and requires us to consider how financial and non-financial factors may impact us and our clients.  

Global practices in the identification, assessment, measurement and management of climate risks and opportunities are 

rapidly evolving. We are continuing to advance our climate risk measurement, management, monitoring and reporting 
capabilities and to advance our understanding of the impact climate-related risks may have on our business and our clients’ 
businesses. In particular: 

(cid:129) We conduct portfolio, client and scenario analyses to assess our exposure to, and the impact of, climate-related risks. 
(cid:129) We continue to refine our climate risk appetite and, as noted above, we have published initial interim emissions 

reduction targets for certain key high-emitting sectors in connection with our goal to achieve net-zero emissions in our 
lending by 2050. 
As part of our annual stress testing and analysis, we continue to integrate components of climate risk through transition 
and physical risk stresses and assess its impact on our key portfolios. 

(cid:129)

(cid:129) We seek to improve data quality to further identify those sectors within our wholesale portfolio that are most affected 

by physical and transition risk, which allows us to better focus ongoing monitoring of climate risk. 

(cid:129) We are expanding our climate data inventory and enhancing our data governance processes to improve our climate risk 

analytical capabilities. 

2 
3 

4 

Sustainable finance refers to financial activities that take into account environmental, social and governance factors. 
Our NZBA commitment, our initial measurement of financed emissions and our initial interim emissions reduction targets exclude the practices of: (a) RBC GAM and 
RBC Wealth Management. RBC Wealth Management includes the following affiliates: RBC Dominion Securities Inc. (Member – Canadian Investor Protection Fund), RBC 
Direct Investing Inc. (Member–Canadian Investor Protection Fund), Royal Mutual Funds Inc., RBC Wealth Management Financial Services Inc., Royal Trust Corporation of 
Canada and The Royal Trust Company, which are separate but affiliated subsidiaries of RBC; and (b) Brewin Dolphin Holdings PLC and its subsidiaries. 
External factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from our expectations expressed in such commitments, goals and targets include the need for 
more and better climate data and standardization of climate-related measurement methodologies, our ability to gather and verify data, our ability to successfully 
implement various initiatives throughout our enterprise under expected time frames, difficulty in identifying transactions, products and services that meet the 
sustainable finance classification criteria, the risk that eligible transactions or related initiatives will not be completed within any specified period or at all or with the 
results or outcome as originally expected or anticipated by us, our ability to track transactions and report on them as performance against our climate or sustainable 
finance commitment, the compliance of various third parties with our policies and procedures and their commitment to us, the need for active and continuing 
participation and action of various stakeholders, technological advancements, the evolution of consumer behaviour, varying decarbonization efforts across economies, 
the need for thoughtful climate policies around the world, the challenges of balancing emission reduction targets with an orderly, just and inclusive transition and 
geopolitical factors that impact global energy needs, the legal and regulatory environment, and regulatory compliance considerations. Our climate- or sustainable 
finance-related commitments, goals and targets are aspirational and may need to be changed or recalibrated as data improve and as climate science, transition 
pathways and market practices regarding standards, methodologies, metrics and measurements evolve. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

103 

As with risk appetite, our continued development of our climate risk measurement capabilities will inform the steps we take 

to further the implementation of climate-related risk limits and advance the integration of climate risks into our policies and 
procedures. 

In addition, we regularly review the risks that we face and reflect on those that affect our clients. We also continue to explore 

opportunities to expand the products and services we provide to respond to the evolving ESG landscape, help our clients 
navigate their transition to a net-zero economy, and advance their sustainability strategies: 

Emerging  
regulatory and  
legal  
requirements  

(cid:129) Climate change regulations, frameworks, and guidance that apply to banks, insurers and asset managers  
are rapidly evolving. Several central banks and regulators have taken steps to introduce or have already  
introduced rules to address the financial and economic risks of climate change. As regulations and  
formal requirements evolve, we will continue to monitor such developments and update our risk  
management practices and disclosures as necessary. See the Legal and regulatory environment risk  
section for further details.  

  

(cid:129) We identify properties that we lease or own, which contain business processes and supporting  

applications that require enhanced facility infrastructure to mitigate site disruptions, such as those  
caused by extreme weather events. We classify critical environment sites based on our business risk  
tolerance for site-specific downtime and, among other things, site location, power supply, exposure to  
flooding, geological stability and other hazards.  

(cid:129) We take steps to mitigate and adapt to climate change through our building design and our purchasing  

Disruptions to  
operations  
and client  
services  

(cid:129) As required, we assess the impact of climate-related events (e.g., floods, hurricanes) on our businesses  

decisions.  

  

and client operations.  

Products and  
services we  
provide  

(cid:129) We maintain a diversified lending portfolio, which improves our resilience to geographic or sectoral  

downturns and limits concentrations of credit exposure to climate risk.  

(cid:129) Each business segment is responsible for identifying material climate-related risks and opportunities,  

which are integrated into risk management processes as necessary.  

(cid:129) We continue to deliver advice and solutions to our clients to support their transition to a net-zero  

economy and the advancement of their sustainability strategies. For example, we provide sustainable  
finance products such as green, social and sustainability bond underwriting, sustainability-linked bonds  
and loans, as well as advisory services to integrate ESG factors for companies that are in the pre-initial  
public offering or pre-acquisition stage. Our offerings also include ESG-integrated investment solutions,  
structured products, carbon trading services, and ESG research and thought leadership. While we  
finance sectors across the economy, we are working to accelerate sustainable finance and to provide  
ESG advisory services to clients, inclusive of energy transition opportunities.   

(cid:129) RBC GAM integrates material ESG factors in its investment processes for applicable investment  

strategies to help mitigate risk and/or enhance long-term, risk-adjusted returns.  

(cid:129) RBC Insurance® (through its insurance agency) sells property and casualty insurance products that are  
underwritten and insured by Aviva Canada Inc. As such, RBC Insurance is not directly exposed to climate-
related risks associated with these products. The property and casualty insurance industry as a whole  
has exposure to longer-term shifts in climate patterns and extreme weather events, which may indirectly  
impact our Insurance business results. We are continuing to advance our understanding of the impact of  
acute and longer term weather events on travel insurance, and for life and health insurance products  
sold to group/business clients.  

(cid:129) Our Personal & Commercial Banking businesses continue to provide products to support clients in the  
net-zero transition, including financing for hybrid and electric vehicles, home energy retrofit financing,  
ESG market-linked GICs and advisory and lending solutions for clean technology.  

  

Climate risk – metrics & targets 
We report annually on environmental performance metrics, including metrics for the value of sustainable financing, 
environmental philanthropy through RBC Tech for Nature, financed emissions, and emissions reduction in our own operations. 
We also published our initial interim emissions reduction targets for certain key high-emitting sectors in October 2022. 

104

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Capital management  

We actively manage our capital to maintain strong capital ratios and high ratings while providing strong returns to our 
shareholders. In addition to the regulatory requirements, we consider the expectations of credit rating agencies, depositors and 
shareholders, as well as our business plans, stress tests, peer comparisons and our internal capital ratio targets. Our goal is to 
optimize our capital usage and structure, and to provide support for our business segments and clients. We also aim to generate 
optimal returns for our shareholders, while protecting depositors and creditors. 

Capital management framework 
Our capital management framework establishes policies and processes for defining, measuring, raising and investing all forms of 
capital in a coordinated and consistent manner. It sets our overall approach to capital management, including guiding principles 
and roles and responsibilities relating to capital adequacy and transactions, dividends, solo capital, management of RWA, 
leverage ratio exposures, TLAC capital and TLAC leverage ratios. We manage and monitor capital from several perspectives, 
including regulatory capital, solo capital and TLAC. 

Our capital planning process is dynamic and involves various teams including Finance, Corporate Treasury, GRM, Economics 
and our businesses, and covers internal capital ratio targets, potential capital transactions as well as projected dividend payouts 
and share repurchases. This process considers our business operating plans, enterprise-wide stress testing and ICAAP, 
regulatory capital changes and supervisory requirements, accounting changes, internal capital requirements, rating agency 
metrics and solo capital. 

Our capital plan is established on an annual basis and is aligned with the management actions included in the annual 
business operating plan, which includes forecast growth in assets and earnings taking into account our business strategies, the 
projected market and economic environment, and peer positioning. This includes incorporating potential capital transactions 
based on our projected internal capital generation, business forecasts, market conditions and other developments, such as 
accounting and regulatory changes that may impact capital requirements. All of the components in the capital plan are 
monitored throughout the year and are revised as deemed appropriate. 

Capital impacts of stress scenarios

Capital impacts of
stress scenarios

Total capital requirements

Enterprise-wide
Stress Testing

ICAAP 

Capital Plan and
Business
Operating Plan

Capital available and target
capital ratios

 

Our enterprise-wide stress testing and annual ICAAP processes provide key inputs for capital planning, including setting 
internal capital ratio targets. The stress scenarios are evaluated across the organization, and results are integrated to develop 
an enterprise-wide view of financial impacts and capital requirements, which in turn facilitate the planning of mitigating actions 
to absorb adverse events. ICAAP assesses capital adequacy and requirements covering all material risks, with a cushion for 
plausible contingencies. In accordance with OSFI guidelines, major components of our ICAAP process include comprehensive risk 
assessment, stress testing, capital assessment and planning, Board and senior management oversight, monitoring and reporting 
and internal control review. 

Our internal capital targets are established to maintain robust capital positions in excess of OSFI’s Basel III regulatory 

targets. The results of our enterprise-wide stress testing and ICAAP processes are incorporated into the OSFI Capital Buffers, 
D-SIB/Globally Systemically Important Banks (G-SIB) surcharge, and Domestic Stability Buffer (DSB), with a view to ensure that 
the bank has adequate capital to underpin risks and absorb losses under all plausible stress scenarios, including situations like 
the recent COVID-19 pandemic, given our risk profile and appetite. In addition, we include a discretionary cushion on top of OSFI’s 
regulatory targets to reflect our risk appetite, our forecasts of potential negative downturns and to maintain our capital strength 
for forthcoming regulatory and accounting changes, peer comparatives, rating agencies sensitivities and solo capital level. 

The Board is responsible for the ultimate oversight of capital management, including the annual review and approval of the 

capital plan. ALCO and GE share responsibility for capital management and receive regular reports detailing our compliance with 
approved limits and guidelines. The Audit and Risk Committees jointly approve the ICAAP process. 

Basel III 
Our consolidated regulatory capital requirements are determined by guidelines issued by OSFI, which are based on the minimum 
Basel III capital ratio requirements adopted by the BCBS. 

Under Basel III, banks select from two main approaches, the Standardized Approach (SA) or the IRB Approach, to calculate 

their minimum regulatory capital required to support credit, market and operational risks. We adopted the Basel III IRB approach 
to calculate credit risk capital for consolidated regulatory reporting purposes. While the majority of our credit risk exposures are 
reported under the Basel III IRB Approach for regulatory capital purposes, certain portfolios continue to use the Basel III SA for 
credit risk (for example, our Caribbean Banking operations and City National). For consolidated regulatory reporting of market 
risk capital, we use both the Internal Models-based and Standardized Approaches, and for consolidated regulatory reporting of 
operational risk capital we use the SA. We determine our regulatory leverage ratio based on OSFI’s LR Guideline, which reflects 
the BCBS Basel III leverage ratio requirements. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

105 

All federally regulated banks with a Basel III leverage ratio total exposure exceeding €200 billion at their financial year-end 

are required, at a minimum, to publicly disclose in the first quarter following their year-end, the twelve indicators used in the 
G-SIB assessment methodology, with the goal of enhancing the transparency of the relative scale of banks’ potential global 
systemic importance and data quality. The FSB publishes an updated list of G-SIBs annually. On November 21, 2022, we were 
re-designated as a G-SIB by the FSB. This designation requires us to maintain a higher loss absorbency requirement (common 
equity as a percentage of RWA) of 1% consistent with the D-SIB requirement. 

Effective November 1, 2021, OSFI’s TLAC guideline established two minimum standards: the risk-based TLAC ratio, which 
builds on the risk-based capital ratios described in the CAR guideline, and the TLAC leverage ratio, which builds on the leverage 
ratio described in OSFI’s LR guideline. The TLAC requirement is intended to address the sufficiency of a D-SIB’s loss absorbing 
capacity in supporting its recapitalization in the event of its failure. TLAC is defined as the aggregate of Tier 1 capital, Tier 2 
capital, and external TLAC instruments, which allow conversion in whole or in part into common shares under the CDIC Act and 
meet all of the eligibility criteria under the TLAC guideline. 

OSFI requires all D-SIBs to publicly disclose their Pillar 2 DSB as part of their quarterly disclosures, similar to other current 
capital-related disclosure requirements. The level of the Pillar 2 buffer ranges between 0% and 2.5% of the entity’s total RWA for 
each of the six systemically important banks in Canada. The DSB requirements must be met at the CET1 capital level. OSFI 
undertakes a review of the DSB on a semi-annual basis, in June and December, and will publicly announce any changes at that 
time. On June 17, 2021, OSFI announced an increase in the DSB from 1.0% to 2.5% of total RWA effective October 31, 2021 and 
reaffirmed this DSB level on June 22, 2022. The 2.5% continues to reflect the highest DSB requirement under OSFI capital 
requirements.  

In Q2 2020, OSFI announced a series of regulatory adjustments and guidance to support the financial and operational resilience 
of the banking sector in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, and continues, as needed, to release regulations implementing, 
clarifying, updating or unwinding certain aspects or requirements. Such measures and guidance include: 
(cid:129) Modifications for increases in expected credit loss provisions on CET1 capital by applying a 25% after-tax exclusion rate for 
growth in Stage 1 and Stage 2 allowances between Q1 2020 and the respective quarters of fiscal 2022. The exclusion rate was 
reduced to the current 25% in fiscal 2022 from 50% in fiscal 2021, and will cease to apply at the beginning of fiscal 2023. These 
modifications are not available for a financial institution’s IRB portfolio in any quarter in which the financial institution has a 
shortfall in allowances. 
Exclusion of central bank reserves and sovereign-issued securities that qualify as HQLA from leverage ratio exposure 
amounts until December 31, 2021. On August 12, 2021, OSFI announced that the exclusion of sovereign-issued securities that 
qualify as HQLA from the leverage ratio exposure measure will not extend beyond December 31, 2021 and that central bank 
reserves will continue to be excluded from the leverage ratio exposure measure. On September 13, 2022, OSFI announced 
that exclusion of these central bank reserves from the leverage ratio will cease effective April 1, 2023. 
Reduction in the current regulatory capital floor for financial institutions using the IRB approach from 75% to 70% of RWA 
under the SA. The reduced floor factor will remain in place until the adoption of the Basel III reforms in Q2 2023. 
Clarification of the applicable capital and leverage ratio treatment of certain government relief programs. 

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

OSFI has assessed and will continue to assess the need for these relief measures. We have incorporated the above 

adjustments and guidance, as applicable, into our results and in our ongoing capital planning activities. 

The following table provides a summary of OSFI’s current regulatory target ratios under Basel III and Pillar 2 requirements. We 
are in compliance with all current capital, leverage and TLAC requirements imposed by OSFI: 

Basel III – OSFI regulatory targets  

Basel III  
capital and  
leverage ratios  

OSFI regulatory target requirements  
for large banks under Basel III  

Minimum  

Capital  
Buffers (1)  

D-SIB/G-SIB  
surcharge (2)  

Minimum  
including  
Capital  
Buffers  

Minimum  
including  
Capital  
Buffers and  
D-SIB/G-SIB  
surcharge (2)   

RBC capital  
and  
leverage  
ratios as at  
October 31,  
2022  

Domestic   
Stability   
  
Buffer (3)

Table 64   

Minimum  
including  
Capital  
Buffers,  
D-SIB/G-SIB  
surcharge and  
Domestic  
Stability  
Buffer as at  
October 31,  
2022  

Common Equity Tier 1  
Tier 1 capital  
Total capital  
Leverage ratio  
TLAC ratio (4)  
TLAC leverage ratio (4)  

4.5%  
6.0%  
8.0%  
3.0%  
21.5%  
6.75%  

2.5%  
2.5%  
2.5%  
n.a.  
n.a.  
n.a.  

7.0%  
8.5%  
10.5%  
3.0%  
21.5%  
6.75%  

1.0%  
1.0%  
1.0%  
n.a.  
n.a.  
n.a.  

8.0%  
9.5%  
11.5%  
3.0%  
21.5%  
6.75%  

12.6%  
13.8%  
15.4%  
4.4%  
26.4%  
8.5%  

2.5%  
2.5%  
2.5%  
n.a.  
2.5%  
n.a.  

10.5%  
12.0%  
14.0%  
3.0%  
24.0%  
6.75%  

The capital buffers include the capital conservation buffer and the countercyclical capital buffer as prescribed by OSFI. 
A capital surcharge, equal to the higher of our D-SIB surcharge and the BCBS’s G-SIB surcharge, is applicable to risk-weighted capital. 
The Domestic Stability Buffer can range from 0% to 2.5% of total RWA and is currently set at 2.5%, reaffirmed by OSFI on June 22, 2022. 
Effective November 1, 2021, OSFI requires D-SIBs to meet minimum risk-based TLAC ratio and TLAC leverage ratio requirements which are calculated using OSFI’s TLAC guideline. 

(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
n.a.  not applicable 

106

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Regulatory capital, TLAC available, RWA, capital and TLAC ratios 
Under Basel III, capital consists of CET1, Additional Tier 1, Tier 2 capital, and external TLAC instruments. 

CET1 capital comprises the highest quality of capital. Regulatory adjustments under Basel III include full deductions of 

certain items and additional capital components that are subject to threshold deductions. 

Tier 1 capital comprises predominantly CET1 and Additional Tier 1 items including non-cumulative preferred shares and 
limited recourse capital notes (LRCNs) that meet certain criteria. Tier 2 capital primarily includes subordinated debentures that 
meet certain criteria and certain loan loss allowances. Total capital is defined as the sum of Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital. Preferred 
shares, LRCNs, and subordinated debentures issued after January 1, 2013 require Non-viability contingent capital (NVCC) features 
to be included into regulatory capital. NVCC requirements ensure that non-common regulatory capital instruments bear losses 
before banks seek government funding. 

TLAC available is defined as the sum of Total capital and external TLAC instruments. External TLAC instruments comprise 
predominantly senior bail-in debt, which includes eligible senior unsecured debt with an original term to maturity of greater than 
400 days and remaining term to maturity of greater than 365 days. 

Capital ratios are calculated by dividing CET1, Tier 1, Total capital and TLAC available by total RWA. 

The following chart provides a summary of the major components of CET1, Additional Tier 1, Tier 2 capital and external TLAC instruments. 

TLAC Available

Total Capital

Tier 1 Capital

+

Additional Tier 1 Capital

+

Tier 2 Capital

+

Preferred shares
Limited recourse capital notes
Non-controlling interests in
subsidiaries Tier 1 instruments

Subordinated debentures less 
amortization
Certain loan loss allowances
Non-controlling interests in
subsidiaries Tier 2 instruments

Non-signiﬁcant investments in
Tier 1 instruments of Financial
Institutions (3)
Signiﬁcant investments in
other Financial Institutions
and Insurance subsidiaries
Tier 1 instruments

Non-signiﬁcant investments in
Tier 2 and TLAC instruments
of Financial Institutions (3)
Signiﬁcant investments in
other Financial Institutions
and Insurance subsidiaries
Tier 2 and TLAC instruments

External TLAC
Instruments

Senior bail-in debt
Amortized portion of subordinated
debentures

Investments in own TLAC
instruments

Common Equity
Tier 1 (CET1) (1)

Common shares
Retained earnings
Other components of equity
Non-controlling interests in
subsidiaries CET1 instruments

Goodwill and other intangibles
Deferred tax assets on loss
carryforwards 
Deﬁned beneﬁt pension fund
assets
Non-signiﬁcant investments
in CET1 instruments of
ﬁnancial institutions (3)
Shortfall of provisions to
expected losses

Signiﬁcant investments in
Insurance subsidiaries and
CET1 instruments in other
ﬁnancial institutions
Mortgage servicing rights
Deferred tax assets relating
to temporary differences

Higher quality
capital

s
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
D

d
l
o
h
s
e
r
h
T

)
2
(
 

s
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
D

(1) 

(2) 

In accordance with OSFI’s regulatory adjustments announced in Q2 2020, and as discussed above, this includes capital modifications associated with Stage 1 
and 2 allowances which were subject to a 25% after-tax exclusion rate in fiscal 2022, and 50% in fiscal 2021. This guidance will cease to apply at the beginning of 
fiscal 2023. 
First level: The amount by which each of the items exceeds a 10% threshold of CET1 capital (after all deductions but before threshold deductions) will be 
deducted from CET1 capital. Second level: The aggregate amount of the three items not deducted from the first level above and in excess of 15% of CET1 capital 
after regulatory adjustments will be deducted from capital, and the remaining balance not deducted will be risk-weighted at 250%. 

(3)  Non-significant investments are subject to certain CAR criteria that drive the amount eligible for deduction. 

Lower quality
capital 

 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

107 

The following tables provide details on our regulatory capital, TLAC available, RWA, and on ratios for capital, leverage and TLAC. 
Our capital position remains strong and our capital, leverage and TLAC ratios remain well above OSFI regulatory targets: 

Regulatory capital, TLAC available, RWA and capital, leverage and TLAC ratios  

Table 65   

  

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts and as otherwise noted)  
Capital (1)  

Risk-weighted assets (RWA) used in calculation of capital ratios (1)  

CET1 capital  
Tier 1 capital  
Total capital  

Credit risk  
Market risk  
Operational risk  

Total RWA  
Capital ratios and Leverage ratio (1)  

CET1 ratio  
Tier 1 capital ratio  
Total capital ratio  
Leverage ratio  
Leverage ratio exposure (billions)  

TLAC available and ratios (2), (3)  

TLAC available  
TLAC ratio  
TLAC leverage ratio  

Capital, RWA, and capital ratios are calculated using OSFI’s CAR guideline and the Leverage ratio is calculated using OSFI’s Leverage 
Requirements (LR) guideline as updated in accordance with the regulatory guidance issued by OSFI in response to the COVID-19 
pandemic. Both the CAR guideline and LR guideline are based on the Basel III framework. 
Effective November 1, 2021, OSFI requires D-SIBs to meet minimum risk-based TLAC ratio and TLAC leverage ratio requirements which are 
calculated using OSFI’s TLAC guideline. 
The TLAC standard is applied at the resolution entity level which for us is deemed to be Royal Bank of Canada and its subsidiaries. A 
resolution entity and its subsidiaries are collectively called a resolution group. Both the TLAC ratio and TLAC leverage ratio are 
calculated using the TLAC available as percentage of total RWA and leverage exposure, respectively. 

n.a.  not applicable 

Regulatory capital and TLAC available  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
CET1 capital: instruments and reserves and regulatory adjustments  
Directly issued qualifying common share capital (and equivalent for  

non-joint stock companies) plus related stock surplus  

Retained earnings  
Accumulated other comprehensive income (and other reserves)  
Directly issued capital subject to phase out from CET1 (only applicable to  

non-joint stock companies)  

Common share capital issued by subsidiaries and held by third parties  

(amount allowed in group CET1)  

Regulatory adjustments applied to CET1 under Basel III  

Common Equity Tier 1 capital (CET1)  

Additional Tier 1 capital: instruments and regulatory adjustments  
Directly issued qualifying Additional Tier 1 instruments plus related  

stock surplus  

Directly issued capital instruments to phase out from Additional Tier 1  
Additional Tier 1 instruments issued by subsidiaries and held by third parties  

(amount allowed in group AT1)  

Regulatory adjustments applied to Additional Tier 1 under Basel III  

Additional Tier 1 capital (AT1)  

Tier 1 capital (T1 = CET1 + AT1)  

Tier 2 capital: instruments and provisions and regulatory adjustments  
Directly issued qualifying Tier 2 instruments plus related stock surplus  
Directly issued capital instruments subject to phase out from Tier 2  
Tier 2 instruments issued by subsidiaries and held by third parties (amount  

allowed in group Tier 2)  

Collective allowance  
Regulatory adjustments applied to Tier 2 under Basel III  

Tier 2 capital (T2)  

  

Total capital (T1 + T2)  

External TLAC: instruments and regulatory adjustments  
External TLAC instruments  
Amortised portion of T2 instruments where remaining maturity > 1 year  
Regulatory adjustments applied to TLAC under Basel III  

TLAC available (Total capital + External TLAC)  

$

  
66,528  
818  
(235)  
$ 160,961  

n.a.  not applicable 

108

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

As at   

October 31  
2022  
  
$ 76,945  
84,242  
93,850  
  
$ 496,898  
35,342  
77,639  
$ 609,879  
  
12.6%  
13.8%  
15.4%  
4.4%  
1,898  
  
$ 160,961  
26.4%  
8.5%  

$

October 31  
2021  
  
$ 75,583  
82,246  
92,026  
  
$ 444,142  
34,806  
73,593  
$ 552,541  
  
13.7%  
14.9%  
16.7%  
4.9%  
1,662  
  
n.a.  
n.a.  
n.a.  

$

Table 66   

As at   

October 31  
2022  

October 31  
2021  

17,162   $ 17,887  
71,563  
77,859  
2,533  
5,725  

11  
11  
(16,411)  
(23,812)  
76,945   $ 75,583  

–  

  

  

7,294   $
–  

6,661  
–  

3  
–  
7,297   $

6,663  
84,242   $ 82,246  

  

–  

  

2  
–  

  

8,587   $
–  

3  
1,018  
–  
9,608   $

  

93,850   $ 92,026  

  
8,443  
448  

26  
863  
–  
9,780  

  

  
n.a.  
n.a.  
n.a.  

n.a.  

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

2022 vs. 2021 

Continuity of CET1 ratio (Basel III)

286 bps

(130) bps

(109) bps

13.7%

(98) bps

(41) bps

(40) bps

27 bps

12.6%

October 31,
2021 (1)

Net income
(2)

Dividends
(2)

RWA growth
(excluding FX)

Share
repurchases

Brewin
Dolphin
acquisition

Fair value
OCI
adjustments

Other (3)

October 31,
2022 (1)

Represents rounded figures. 

(1) 
(2)  Represents net internal capital generation of $9 billion or 156 bps consisting of Net income available to shareholders, less common and preferred share 

dividends and distributions on other equity instruments. 
Includes net credit migration of 14 bps, model updates of 13 bps and other movements. 

(3) 

 

Our CET1 ratio was 12.6%, down 110 bps from last year, mainly reflecting RWA growth (excluding FX), share repurchases, the 
impact of our Brewin Dolphin acquisition, and the unfavourable impact of fair value OCI adjustments. These factors were 
partially offset by net internal capital generation, favourable net credit migration and model updates. 

Our Tier 1 capital ratio of 13.8% was down 110 bps, reflecting the factors noted above under the CET1 ratio and a favourable 

impact from the net issuance of preferred shares. 

Our Total capital ratio of 15.4% was down 130 bps, reflecting the factors noted above under the Tier 1 capital ratio and a 

favourable impact from the net issuance of subordinated debentures. 

Our Leverage ratio of 4.4% was down 50 bps, mainly reflecting share repurchases, business-driven growth in leverage exposures, 
lower regulatory modifications, the unfavourable impact of fair value OCI adjustments, and the impact of our Brewin Dolphin 
acquisition. These factors were partially offset by net internal capital generation. 

Leverage exposures increased by $236 billion mainly driven by business growth in retail and wholesale loans, and undrawn 
commitments. The impact of foreign exchange translation and lower regulatory modifications, mainly due to the reversal of the 
sovereign-issued securities qualifying as HQLA, also contributed to the increase. 

Our TLAC ratio of 26.4% was up 70 bps from 25.7% as at October 31, 2021, reflecting a favourable impact from the net issuance of 
external TLAC instruments, partially offset by the factors noted above under the Total capital ratio. 

Our TLAC leverage ratio of 8.5% was down 10 bps from 8.6%, as at October 31, 2021, reflecting the factors noted above under 

the Leverage ratio, partially offset by a favourable impact from the net issuance of external TLAC instruments. 

External TLAC instruments include long-term senior debt subject to conversion into common shares under the Bail-in regime. 

For further details, refer to Deposit and funding profile in the Liquidity and funding risk section. 

Basel III RWA 
OSFI requires banks to meet minimum risk-based capital requirements for exposures to credit risk, operational risk, and where 
they have significant trading activity, market risk. RWA is calculated for each of these risk types and added together to determine 
total RWA. In addition, a minimum capital floor requirement must be maintained as prescribed under OSFI’s CAR guidelines which 
is currently set to 70% of RWA as calculated under current Basel III standardized credit risk and market risk approaches as 
defined in the CAR guidelines. If the capital requirement is less than the required threshold, a floor adjustment to RWA must be 
applied to the reported RWA as prescribed by OSFI’s CAR guidelines. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

109 

Total risk-weighted assets  

  

  

As at October 31 (Millions of Canadian dollars,  
except percentage amounts)  

Credit risk  

Lending-related and other  

Residential mortgages (3)   
Other retail (3)  
Business  
Sovereign  
Bank  

2022  

Risk-weighted assets  

Table 67   

  

  

2021  

  

Exposure (1)  
  
  
$ 500,986  
245,633  
476,896  
340,529  
30,348  

Average  
of risk-
weights (2)  
  
  

Standardized  
approach  
  
  
8%   $ 13,518   $ 28,144   $

Advanced  
approach  
  
  

27%  
50%  
5%  
18%  

8,307  

57,199  
72,399   166,424  
12,876  
3,999  

3,034  
1,484  

Other  
  
  

Total     
    
    

Total  
  
  
–   $ 41,662    $ 34,958  
63,422  
–  
–   238,823     200,553  
14,412  
–  
4,756  
–  

15,910    
5,483    

65,506    

Total lending-related and other  

$ 1,594,392  

23%   $ 98,742   $ 268,642   $

–   $ 367,384    $ 318,101  

Trading-related  

Repo-style transactions  
Derivatives  

  
$ 987,066  
137,865  

  
1%   $

  
18   $

  

8,557   $

  
93   $

29%  

2,284  

21,566  

16,288  

    

8,668    $

40,138    

  
9,537  
42,377  

Total trading-related  

$ 1,124,931  

4%   $

2,302   $ 30,123   $ 16,381   $ 48,806    $ 51,914  

Total lending-related and other and  

trading-related  
Bank book equities  
Securitization exposures  
Regulatory scaling factor  
Other assets  

Total credit risk  

Market risk  

Interest rate  
Equity  
Foreign exchange  
Commodities  
Specific risk  
Incremental risk charge  

Total market risk  

Operational risk  

$ 2,719,323  
4,346  
74,839  
n.a.  
31,620  

15%   $ 101,044   $ 298,765   $ 16,381   $ 416,190    $ 370,015  
5,474  
10,328  
16,485  
41,840  

5,682    
12,543    
18,267    
44,216    

5,682  
6,631  
18,267  
n.a.  

–  
–  
n.a.  
44,216  

–  
5,912  
n.a.  
n.a.  

131%  
17%  
n.a.  
140%  

$ 2,830,128  

18%   $ 106,956   $ 329,345   $ 60,597   $ 496,898    $ 444,142  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

  

  
   $
  
  
  
  
  

  
2,321  
2,538  
3,394  
1,630  
7,370  
–  

  
10,935  
1,463  
341  
120  
1,041  
4,189  

  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  

    

  
13,256    $ 14,380  
4,178  
3,083  
762  
7,601  
4,802  

4,001    
3,735    
1,750    
8,411    
4,189    

   $ 17,253   $ 18,089   $

–   $ 35,342    $ 34,806  

   $ 77,639  

–  

n.a.   $ 77,639    $ 73,593  

Total risk-weighted assets  

$ 2,830,128  

   $ 201,848   $ 347,434   $ 60,597   $ 609,879    $ 552,541  

(1) 

Total exposure represents EAD which is the expected gross exposure upon the default of an obligor. This amount is before any allowance against impaired loans or 
partial write-offs and does not reflect the impact of credit risk mitigation and collateral held. 

(2)  Represents the average of counterparty risk weights within a particular category. 
(3)  Home equity line of credit (HELOC) exposures under the IRB Approach reported as “Other Retail” in this table have now been grouped with Residential Mortgages to 
ensure consistent classification between the Standardized Approach and the IRB Approach. Prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with this 
presentation. 
n.a.  not applicable 

2022 vs. 2021 
During the year, RWA was up $57 billion, mainly reflecting business growth in commercial and corporate lending, and residential 
mortgages, as well as the impact of foreign exchange translation. These factors were partially offset by favourable net credit 
migration, primarily in our wholesale portfolios, and model updates. The model updates mainly reflect the impact of the Q2 2020 
period of significant market volatility no longer being reflected in our two-year historical VaR period. In our CET1 ratio the impact 
of foreign exchange translation on RWA is largely mitigated with economic hedges. 

110

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Selected capital management activity 

Selected capital management activity  

Table 68   

  

For the year ended October 31, 2022  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except number of shares)  

Tier 1 capital  
Common shares activity  

Issued in connection with share-based  

compensation plans (1)  

Purchased for cancellation (2)  

Issuance of preferred shares, Series BT (2), (3)  
Redemption of preferred shares, Series BJ (2), (3)  
Tier 2 capital  
Issuance of May 3, 2032 subordinated  

Issuance or  
redemption date  

Number of  

shares (000s)   Amount  

  
  
November 5, 2021  
February 24, 2022  

1,270  
(40,866)  
750  
(6,000)  

$

99  
(509)  
750  
(150)  

  
  

  

  
  

  

  
  

  

  

debentures (3), (4)  

(1) 
(2) 
(3)  NVCC instruments. 
(4) 

Amounts include cash received for stock options exercised during the period and fair value adjustments to stock options. 
For further details, refer to Note 20 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

For further details, refer to Note 19 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

January 25, 2022  

1,000  

On December 6, 2021, we announced a normal course issuer bid (NCIB) to purchase up to 45 million of our common shares, 
commencing on December 8, 2021 and continuing until December 7, 2022, or such earlier date as we complete the repurchase of 
all shares permitted under the bid. Since the inception of this NCIB, the total number of common shares repurchased and 
cancelled was approximately 41 million, at a cost of approximately $5,426 million. 

We determine the amount and timing of purchases under the NCIB, subject to prior consultation with OSFI. Purchases may 
be made through the TSX, the NYSE and other designated exchanges and alternative Canadian trading systems. The price paid 
for repurchased shares is the prevailing market price at the time of acquisition. 

On November 5, 2021, we issued 750 thousand of Non-Cumulative 5-Year Fixed Rate Reset First Preferred Shares Series BT to 

certain institutional investors at a price of $1,000 per share. 

On January 25, 2022, we issued $1,000 million of NVCC subordinated debentures. The notes bear interest at a fixed rate of 

2.94% per annum until May 3, 2027, and at the three-month CDOR plus 0.76% thereafter until their maturity on May 3, 2032. 
On February 24, 2022, we redeemed all 6 million of our issued and outstanding Non-Cumulative First Preferred Shares 

Series BJ at a price of $25.75 per share. 

Dividends 
Our common share dividend policy reflects our earnings outlook, payout ratio objective and the need to maintain adequate 
levels of capital to support business plans. In 2022, our dividend payout ratio was 45%. Common share dividends paid during the 
year were $7 billion.  

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

111 

Selected share data (1)  

  

2022  

  

2021  

Table 69   

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except number of shares  
and as otherwise noted)  

Number of  
shares (000s)  

Amount  

Dividends  
declared  
per share  

  
  
  

Number of  
shares (000s)  

Amount  

Dividends  
declared  
per share  

Common shares issued  
Treasury shares – common shares (2)  

1,385,591   $17,318  
(334)  

(2,680)  

$ 4.96    
    

1,425,187   $ 17,728  
(73)  

(662)  

$ 4.32  
  

Common shares outstanding  

1,382,911   $16,984  

1,424,525   $ 17,655  

Stock options and awards  

Outstanding  
Exercisable  
Available for grant  

First preferred shares issued  

Non-cumulative Series AZ (3), (4)  
Non-cumulative Series BB (3), (4)  
Non-cumulative Series BD (3), (4)  
Non-cumulative Series BF (3), (4)  
Non-cumulative Series BH (4)  
Non-cumulative Series BI (4)  
Non-cumulative Series BJ (4)  
Non-cumulative Series BO (3), (4)  
Non-cumulative Series BT (3), (4), (5)  
Non-cumulative Series C-2 (6)  
Other equity instruments issued  
Limited recourse capital notes  

Series 1 (3), (4), (7), (8)  

Limited recourse capital notes  

Series 2 (3), (4), (7), (8)  

Limited recourse capital notes  

Series 3 (3), (4), (7), (8)  

Preferred shares and other equity  

instruments issued  

Treasury instruments – preferred shares  

and other equity instruments (2)  

Preferred shares and other equity  

instruments outstanding  

Dividends on common shares  
Dividends on preferred shares and  
distributions on other equity  
instruments (9)  

  
7,535  
3,502  
4,696  

  

20,000   $
20,000  
24,000  
12,000  
6,000  
6,000  
–  
14,000  
750  
15  
  

  
  
  
  

  
500  
500  
600  
300  
150  
150  
–  
350  
750  

    
$ 0.93    
0.91    
0.80    
0.75    
1.23    
1.23    
0.33    
1.20    
4.20%    
23   US$ 67.50    
    

  

  
7,653  
3,273  
5,847  

  

20,000   $
20,000  
24,000  
12,000  
6,000  
6,000  
6,000  
14,000  
–  
15  
  

  
  
  
  

  
500  
500  
600  
300  
150  
150  
150  
350  
–  

  
$ 0.93  
0.91  
0.80  
0.75  
1.23  
1.23  
1.31  
1.20  
–  
23   US$ 67.50  
  

  

1,750  

1,750  

4.50%    

1,750  

1,750  

4.50%  

1,250  

1,250  

4.00%    

1,250  

1,250  

4.00%  

1,000  

1,000  

3.65%    

1,000  

1,000  

3.65%  

106,765   $ 7,323  

112,015   $ 6,723  

(12)  

(5)  

(164)  

(39)  

106,753   $ 7,318  

   $ 6,946  

111,851   $ 6,684  

   $ 6,158  

  

247  

  

257  

    

    
    
    
    

    

    

    

    

    

  

  
  
  
  

  

  

  

  

  

For further details about our capital management activity, refer to Note 20 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Positive amounts represent a short position and negative amounts represent a long position. 

(1) 
(2) 
(3)  Dividend rate will reset every five years. 
(4)  NVCC instruments. 
(5) 
(6)  Represents 615,400 depositary shares relating to preferred shares Series C-2. Each depositary share represents one-fortieth interest in a share of Series C-2. 
(7) 

The dividends declared per share represent per annum dividend rate applicable to the shares issued as at the reporting date. 

For Limited Recourse Capital Notes (LRCN) Series, the number of shares represent the number of notes issued and the dividends declared per share represent the annual 
interest rate percentage applicable to the notes issued as at the reporting date. 
In connection with the issuance of LRCN Series 1, on July 28, 2020, we issued $1,750 million of First Preferred Shares Series BQ (Series BQ); in connection with the issuance 
of LRCN Series 2, on November 2, 2020, we issued $1,250 million of First Preferred Shares Series BR (Series BR); and in connection with the issuance of LRCN Series 3, on 
June 8, 2021, we issued $1,000 million of First Preferred Shares Series BS (Series BS). The Series BQ, BR and BS preferred shares were issued at a price of $1,000 per share 
and were issued to a consolidated trust to be held as trust assets in connection with the LRCN structure. For further details, refer to Note 20 of our 2022 Annual 
Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Excludes distributions to non-controlling interests. 

(9) 

(8) 

112

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

As at November 25, 2022, the number of outstanding common shares was 1,382,866,527, net of treasury shares held of 2,788,345, 
and the number of stock options and awards was 7,471,143. 

NVCC provisions require the conversion of the capital instrument into a variable number of common shares in the event that 

OSFI deems a bank to be non-viable or a federal or provincial government in Canada publicly announces that a bank has 
accepted or agreed to accept a capital injection. If a NVCC trigger event were to occur, our NVCC capital instruments as at 
October 31, 2022, which were the preferred shares Series AZ, BB, BD, BF, BH, BI, BO, BT, LRCN Series 1, LRCN Series 2, LRCN 
Series 3 and subordinated debentures due on January 27, 2026, July 25, 2029, December 23, 2029, June 30, 2030, January 28, 2033, 
November 3, 2031, and May 3, 2032 would be converted into common shares pursuant to an automatic conversion formula with a 
conversion price based on the greater of: (i) a contractual floor price of $5.00, and (ii) the current market price of our common 
shares at the time of the trigger event (10-day weighted average). Based on a floor price of $5.00 and including an estimate for 
accrued dividends and interest, these NVCC capital instruments would convert into a maximum of 4,541 million common shares, 
in aggregate, which would represent a dilution impact of 76.66% based on the number of common shares outstanding as at 
October 31, 2022. 

Attributed capital 
Our methodology for allocating capital to our business segments is based on the Basel III regulatory capital requirements, with 
the exception of Insurance. For Insurance, the allocation of capital is based on fully diversified economic capital. Risk-based 
capital attribution provides a uniform base for performance measurement among business segments, which compares to our 
overall corporate return objective and facilitates management decisions in resource allocation in conjunction with other factors. 
The calculation and attribution of capital involves a number of assumptions and judgments by management which are 

monitored to ensure that the regulatory capital framework remains comprehensive and consistent. The models are benchmarked 
to leading industry practices via participation in surveys, reviews of methodologies and ongoing interaction with external risk 
management industry professionals. 

For additional information on the risks highlighted below, refer to the Risk management section. 

RWA (C$ millions) (1)
$496,898
Credit 
Market 
 35,342
Operational  77,639
$609,879
                                    
                                     

63%
  6
11

Attributed capital (1)
Credit 
Market 
Operational 
Goodwill
and other 
intangibles 
16
Other (2)                                   4

Royal Bank of
Canada

Personal &
Commercial
Banking

Wealth
Management

Insurance

Investor &
Treasury Services

Capital Markets

RWA (C$ millions) (1)
$179,465
Credit 
Market 
272
Operational  30,347
$210,084

RWA (C$ millions) (1)
$100,949
Credit 
Market 
693
Operational  22,637
$124,279

RWA (C$ millions) (1), (3)
Credit 
Market 
Operational 

$15,507
–
–
$15,507

RWA (C$ millions) (1)
Credit 
Market 
Operational 

$16,478
3,727
4,587
$24,792

RWA (C$ millions) (1)
$174,661
Credit 
Market 
28,820
Operational  19,774
$223,255

67%
–
12

Attributed capital (1)
Credit 
Market  
Operational 
Goodwill                          
and other 
intangibles 
Other (2) 

16
5

50%
–
     12

Attributed capital (1)
Credit 
Market  
Operational 
Goodwill               
and other 
intangibles 
Other (2) 

     36
2

12%

Attributed capital (1)
Based on Economic
Capital:
Credit 
Market                    14 
Operational 
8
Goodwill
and other 
intangibles 
Other (2) 

10
56

57%
10
16

Attributed capital (1)
Credit 
Market  
Operational 
Goodwill
and other 
intangibles 
Other (2) 

15
2

69%
 13
8

Attributed capital (1)
Credit 
Market  
Operational 
Goodwill
and other 
intangibles 
Other (2) 

  7
  3

 

RWA amount represents period-end spot balances. Attributed Capital represents average balances. 

(1) 
(2)  Other includes (a) non-Insurance segments: equity required to underpin Basel III regulatory capital deductions other than Goodwill and other intangibles as well as 

capital modifications for expected loss provisioning and (b) Insurance segment: equity required to underpin risks associated with business, fixed assets and insurance 
risks. 
Insurance RWA represents our investments in the insurance subsidiaries capitalized at the regulatory prescribed rate as required under the OSFI CAR guideline. 

(3) 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

113 

Other considerations affecting capital 
Capital treatment for equity investments in other entities is determined by a combination of accounting and regulatory 
guidelines based on the size or nature of the investment. Three broad approaches apply as follows: 
Consolidation: entities which we control are consolidated on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
(cid:129)
Deduction: certain holdings are deducted from our regulatory capital. These include all unconsolidated “substantial 
(cid:129)
investments,” as defined by the Bank Act (Canada) in the capital of financial institutions, as well as all investments in 
insurance subsidiaries. 
Risk-weighting: equity investments that are not deducted from capital are risk-weighted at a prescribed rate for 
determination of capital charges. 

(cid:129)

Regulatory capital approach for securitization exposures 
Our securitization regulatory capital approach reflects Chapter 7 of OSFI’s CAR guidelines. For our securitization exposures, we 
use an internal assessment approach (IAA) for exposures related to our ABCP business, and as per regulatory guidelines for 
other securitization exposures we use a combination of approaches including an external ratings based approach, an IRB 
approach and a standardized approach. 

While our IAA rating methodologies are based in large part on criteria that are published by External Credit Assessment 
Institutions (ECAIs) such as S&P and therefore are similar to the methodologies used by these institutions, they are not identical. 
Our ratings process includes a comparison of the available credit enhancement in a securitization structure to a stressed level of 
projected losses. The stress level used is determined by the desired risk profile of the transaction. As a result, we stress the cash 
flows of a given transaction at a higher level in order to achieve a higher rating. Conversely, transactions that only pass lower 
stress levels achieve lower ratings. 

Most of the other securitization exposures (non-ABCP) carry external ratings and we use the external rating for determining 

the proper capital allocation for these positions. We periodically compare our own ratings to ECAIs ratings to ensure that the 
ratings provided by ECAIs are reasonable. 

GRM is responsible for providing risk assessments for capital purposes in respect of all our banking book exposures. GRM is 

independent of the business originating the securitization exposures and performs its own analysis, sometimes in conjunction 
with but always independent of the applicable business. GRM has developed asset class specific criteria guidelines which 
provide the rating methodologies for each asset class. The guidelines are reviewed periodically and are subject to the ratings 
replication process mandated by Pillar I of the Basel rules. 

Regulatory developments 
Basel III reforms 
On November 11, 2021, BCBS finalized the disclosure requirements for the Minimum capital requirements for market risk 
standards published in January 2019.  

On January 31, 2022, OSFI announced revised capital, leverage, liquidity and disclosure rules that incorporate the final BCBS 
Basel III reforms. The revised rules include new CAR, LR, LAR guidelines and related Pillar 3 disclosure requirements. The revised 
CAR (other than credit valuation adjustment and market risk), LR and Pillar 3 guidelines come into effect for us in Q2 2023. The 
revised LAR guidelines are effective for us on April 1, 2023. The revised CVA and market risk chapters of the CAR guidelines are 
effective for us in Q1 2024. We continue to assess the impact of the revised frameworks and are taking appropriate steps to ensure 
we are ready for adoption in Q2 2023 and Q1 2024. We do not anticipate any issues in complying with the new framework 
requirements. We expect to continue to engage with OSFI on the domestic implementation of the Basel III reforms and are taking 
appropriate steps to ensure required adoption readiness based on guidance provided to date. 

Assurance on Capital, Leverage and Liquidity Returns 
On November 7, 2022, OSFI released a new guideline – Assurance on Capital, Leverage and Liquidity Returns, which establishes 
expectations on OSFI’s assurance requirements over regulatory returns. This guideline provides principles-based and risk-based 
guidance to external auditors and institutions in an effort to enhance and align these expectations across all federally regulated 
financial institutions (FRFIs). This guidance will be effective for us beginning in fiscal 2023. We are assessing the finalised 
requirements and we do not anticipate any issues in meeting OSFI’s minimum assurance requirements for our regulatory filings 
related to our capital (including TLAC), leverage and liquidity returns. 

Accounting and control matters  

Critical accounting policies and estimates  

Application of critical accounting policies, judgments, estimates and assumptions 
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. Certain of 
these policies and related estimates are recognized as critical because they require us to make particularly subjective or 
complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain and significantly different amounts could be reported under 
different conditions or using different assumptions. Our critical accounting judgments, estimates and assumptions relate to the 
fair value of financial instruments, ACL, goodwill and other intangible assets, employee benefits, consolidation, derecognition of 
financial assets, application of the effective interest method, provisions, insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities, and 
income taxes. Our critical accounting policies and estimates have been reviewed and approved by our Audit Committee, in 
consultation with management, as part of their review and approval of our significant accounting policies, judgments, estimates 
and assumptions. 

Fair value of financial instruments 
The fair value of a financial instrument is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an 
orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. We determine fair value by incorporating factors that 
market participants would consider in setting a price, including commonly accepted valuation approaches. 

114

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

We give priority to third-party pricing services and valuation techniques with the highest and most consistent accuracy. The level 

of accuracy is determined over time by comparing third-party price values to traders’ or system values, other pricing service values 
and, when available, actual trade data. Other valuation techniques are used when a price or quote is not available. Some valuation 
processes use models to determine fair value. We have a systematic and consistent approach to control the use of models. 

In determining fair value, a hierarchy is used which prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques. The fair value hierarchy 

gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs. Fair 
values established based on this hierarchy require the use of observable market data whenever available. Level 1 inputs are 
unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that we have the ability to access at the 
measurement date. Level 2 inputs include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for 
identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active, and model inputs that are either observable, or can be 
corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities. Level 3 inputs include one or 
more inputs that are unobservable and significant to the fair value of the asset or liability. Unobservable inputs are used to 
measure fair value to the extent that observable inputs are not available at the measurement date. The availability of inputs for 
valuation may affect the selection of valuation techniques. The classification of a financial instrument in the fair value hierarchy 
for disclosure purposes is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the measurement of fair value. 

Where observable prices or inputs are not available, management judgment is required to determine fair values by 

assessing other relevant sources of information such as historical data, proxy information from similar transactions, and through 
extrapolation and interpolation techniques. For more complex or illiquid instruments, significant judgment is required to 
determine the model used, select the model inputs, and in some cases, apply valuation adjustments to the model value or quoted 
price for inactively traded financial instruments. The selection of model inputs may be subjective and the inputs may be 
unobservable. Unobservable inputs are inherently uncertain as there is little or no market data available from which to 
determine the level at which the transaction would occur under normal business circumstances. Appropriate parameter 
uncertainty and market risk valuation adjustments for such inputs and other model risk valuation adjustments are assessed in all 
such instances. 

Valuation adjustments may be subjective as they require significant judgment in the input selection, such as the PD and 
recovery rate, and are intended to arrive at a fair value that is determined based on assumptions that market participants would 
use in pricing the financial instrument. The realized price for a transaction may be different from its recorded value that was 
previously estimated using management judgment, and may therefore impact unrealized gains and losses recognized in 
Non-interest income – Trading revenue or Other. 

For further information on the fair value of financial instruments, refer to Notes 2 and 3 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated 

Financial Statements. 

Allowance for credit losses 
An ACL is established for all financial assets, except for financial assets classified or designated as FVTPL and equity securities 
designated as FVOCI, which are not subject to impairment assessment. Assets subject to impairment assessment include certain 
loans, debt securities, interest-bearing deposits with banks, customers’ liability under acceptances, accounts and accrued 
interest receivable, and finance and operating lease receivables. Off-balance sheet items subject to impairment assessment 
include financial guarantees and undrawn loan commitments. 

We measure the ACL on each balance sheet date according to a three-stage expected credit loss impairment model: 
(cid:129)

Stage 1 – From initial recognition of a financial asset to the date on which the asset has experienced a significant 
increase in credit risk relative to its initial recognition, a loss allowance is recognized equal to the credit losses 
expected to result from defaults occurring over the 12 months following the reporting date. 
Stage 2 – Following a significant increase in credit risk relative to the initial recognition of the financial asset, a loss 
allowance is recognized equal to the credit losses expected over the remaining lifetime of the asset. 

(cid:129)

Performing financial assets 
(cid:129)

(cid:129)

Impaired financial assets 
(cid:129)

Stage 3 – When a financial asset is considered to be credit-impaired, a loss allowance is recognized equal to credit 
losses expected over the remaining lifetime of the asset. Interest income is calculated based on the carrying 
amount of the asset, net of the loss allowance, rather than on its gross carrying amount. 

The ACL is a discounted probability-weighted estimate of the cash shortfalls expected to result from defaults over the relevant 
time horizon. For loan commitments, credit loss estimates consider the portion of the commitment that is expected to be drawn 
over the relevant time period. For financial guarantees, credit loss estimates are based on the expected payments required under 
the guarantee contract. For finance lease receivables, credit loss estimates are based on cash flows consistent with the cash 
flows used in measuring the lease receivable. 

The ACL represents an unbiased estimate of expected credit losses on our financial assets as at the balance sheet date. 
Judgment is required in making assumptions and estimations when calculating the ACL, including movements between the three 
stages, the inclusion of forward looking information and the application of expert credit judgment. The underlying assumptions 
and estimates may result in changes to the provisions from period to period that significantly affect our results of operations. 

For further information on ACL, refer to Notes 2, 4 and 5 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Goodwill and other intangible assets 
We allocate goodwill to groups of cash-generating units (CGU). Goodwill is not amortized and is tested for impairment on an 
annual basis, or more frequently if there are objective indications of impairment. We test for impairment by comparing the 
recoverable amount of a CGU with its carrying amount. 

We estimate the value in use and fair value less costs of disposal of our CGUs primarily using a discounted cash flow method 

which incorporates each CGU’s internal forecasts of revenues and expenses. Significant management judgment is applied in the 
determination of expected future cash flows (uncertainty in timing and amount), discount rates (based on CGU-specific risks) 
and terminal growth rates. CGU-specific risks include country risk, business/operational risk, geographic risk (including political 
risk, devaluation risk and government regulation), currency risk and price risk (including product pricing risk and inflation). If the 
future cash flows and other assumptions in future periods deviate significantly from the current amounts used in our impairment 
testing, the value of our goodwill could become impaired. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

115 

We assess for indicators of impairment of our other intangible assets at each reporting period. If there is an indication that 

an asset may be impaired, an impairment test is performed by comparing the carrying amount of the intangible asset to its 
recoverable amount. Where it is not possible to estimate the recoverable amount of an individual asset, we estimate the 
recoverable amount of the CGU to which the asset belongs. Significant judgment is applied in estimating the useful lives and 
recoverable amounts of our intangible assets and assessing whether certain events or circumstances constitute objective 
evidence of impairment. We do not have any intangible assets with indefinite lives. 

For further details, refer to Notes 2 and 11 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Employee benefits 
We sponsor a number of benefit programs for eligible employees, including registered pension plans, supplemental pension 
plans, health, dental, disability and life insurance plans. 

The calculation of defined benefit expenses and obligations depends on various assumptions such as discount rates, 
healthcare cost trend rates, projected salary increases, retirement age, and mortality and termination rates. Discount rates are 
determined using a yield curve based on spot rates from high quality corporate bonds. All other assumptions are determined by 
us and are reviewed by the actuaries. Actual experience that differs from the actuarial assumptions will affect the amounts of 
benefit obligations and remeasurements that we recognize. The weighted average assumptions used and the sensitivity of key 
assumptions are presented in Note 17 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Consolidation of structured entities 
Subsidiaries are those entities, including structured entities, over which we have control. We control an entity when we are 
exposed, or have rights, to variable returns from our involvement with the entity and have the ability to affect those returns 
through our power over the investee. We have power over an entity when we have existing rights that give us the current ability 
to direct the activities that most significantly affect the entity’s returns (relevant activities). Power may be determined on the 
basis of voting rights or, in the case of structured entities, other contractual arrangements. 

We are not deemed to control an entity when we exercise power over an entity as the agent of a third party or parties. In 
determining whether we are acting as an agent, we consider the overall relationship between us, the investee and other parties 
to the arrangement with respect to the following factors: (i) the scope of our decision-making power; (ii) the rights held by other 
parties; (iii) the remuneration to which we are entitled; and (iv) our exposure to variability of returns. 

The determination of control is based on the current facts and circumstances and is continuously assessed. In some 

circumstances, different factors and conditions may indicate that various parties control an entity depending on whether those 
factors and conditions are assessed in isolation or in totality. Significant judgment is applied in determining whether we control 
an entity, specifically, assessing whether we have substantive decision-making rights over the relevant activities and whether we 
are exercising our power as a principal or an agent. 

We consolidate all subsidiaries from the date control is transferred to us, and cease consolidation when an entity is no 
longer controlled by us. Our consolidation conclusions affect the classification and amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and 
expenses reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements. 

For further details, refer to Note 8 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Derecognition of financial assets 
We periodically enter into transactions in which we transfer financial assets such as loans or MBS to structured entities or trusts 
that issue securities to investors. We derecognize the assets when our contractual rights to the cash flows from the assets have 
expired; when we retain the rights to receive the cash flows but assume an obligation to pay those cash flows to a third party 
subject to certain pass-through requirements; or when we transfer our contractual rights to receive the cash flows and 
substantially all of the risks and rewards of the assets have been transferred. When we retain substantially all of the risks and 
rewards of the transferred assets, the transferred assets are not derecognized from our Consolidated Balance Sheets and are 
accounted for as secured financing transactions. When we neither retain nor transfer substantially all risks and rewards of 
ownership of the assets, we derecognize the assets if control over the assets is relinquished. If we retain control over the 
transferred assets, we continue to recognize the transferred assets to the extent of our continuing involvement. Management 
judgment is applied in determining whether we have transferred or retained substantially all risk and rewards of ownership of the 
transferred financial asset. 

The majority of assets transferred under repurchase agreements, securities lending agreements, and in our Canadian 

residential mortgage securitization transactions do not qualify for derecognition. As a result, we continue to record the 
associated transferred assets on our Consolidated Balance Sheets and no gains or losses are recognized for those securitization 
activities. Otherwise, a gain or loss is recognized on securitization by comparing the carrying amount of the transferred asset 
with its fair value at the date of the transfer. For further information on derecognition of financial assets, refer to Notes 2 and 7 of 
our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Application of the effective interest method 
Interest is recognized in Interest income and Interest expense in the Consolidated Statements of Income generally for all interest 
bearing financial instruments using the effective interest method. The effective interest rate is the rate that discounts estimated 
future cash flows over the expected life of the financial asset or liability to the net carrying amount upon initial recognition. 
Significant judgment is applied in determining the effective interest rate due to uncertainty in the timing and amounts of future 
cash flows. 

Provisions 
Provisions are liabilities of uncertain timing or amount and are recognized when we have a present legal or constructive 
obligation as a result of a past event, it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation, and a 
reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation. Provisions are measured as the best estimate of the consideration 
required to settle the present obligation at the reporting date. Significant judgment is required in determining whether a present 
obligation exists and in estimating the probability, timing and amount of any outflows. We record provisions related to litigation, 
asset retirement obligations and other items. 

116

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

The forward-looking nature of these estimates requires us to use a significant amount of judgment in projecting the timing 
and amount of future cash flows. We record our provisions on the basis of all available information at the end of the reporting 
period and make adjustments on a quarterly basis to reflect current expectations. Should actual results differ from our 
expectations, we may incur expenses in excess of the provisions recognized. 

Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities 
Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities represent current claims and estimates for future insurance policy benefits. 
Liabilities for life insurance contracts are determined using the Canadian Asset Liability Method, which incorporates 
assumptions for mortality, morbidity, policy lapses and surrenders, investment yields, policy dividends, operating and policy 
maintenance expenses, and provisions for adverse deviation. Key assumptions are reviewed annually and updated in response 
to actual experience and market conditions. Liabilities for property and casualty insurance represent estimated provisions for 
reported and unreported claims. Liabilities for life and property and casualty insurance are included in Insurance claims and 
policy benefit liabilities. Changes in Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities are included in the Insurance policyholder 
benefits, claims and acquisition expense in our Consolidated Statements of Income in the period in which the estimates change. 
Refer to Note 15 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. 

Income taxes 
We are subject to income tax laws in various jurisdictions where we operate, and the complex tax laws are potentially subject to 
different interpretations by us and the relevant taxation authority. Management judgment is applied in interpreting the relevant 
tax laws, in assessing the probability of acceptance of our tax positions by the relevant tax authorities and in estimating the 
expected timing and amount of the provision for current and deferred income taxes. A deferred tax asset or liability is determined 
for each temporary difference based on the tax rates that are expected to be in effect in the period that the asset is realized or 
the liability is settled, except for earnings related to our subsidiaries, branches, associates and interests in joint ventures where 
the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future and we have the ability to control the timing of reversal. 

On a quarterly basis, we review whether it is probable that the benefits associated with our deferred tax assets will be 
realized, using both positive and negative evidence. Refer to Note 22 of our 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements for 
further information. 

Future changes in accounting policy and disclosure 

IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts (IFRS 17) 
In May 2017, the IASB issued IFRS 17 to establish a comprehensive insurance standard which provides guidance on the 
recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosures of insurance contracts. IFRS 17 requires entities to measure insurance 
contract liabilities at their current fulfillment values using one of three approaches depending on the nature of the contract. In 
June 2020, the IASB issued amendments to IFRS 17, including deferral of the effective date by two years. This new standard will be 
effective for us on November 1, 2023 and will be applied retrospectively with restatement of comparatives. If full retrospective 
application to a group of contracts is impracticable, the modified retrospective or fair value approach may be used. To manage 
the transition to IFRS 17, we established a comprehensive program and governance structure led by Finance and the Insurance 
business that focuses on the evaluation of the impacts of the standard and implementation of policies, systems and processes 
required for the adoption. Significant progress has been made in preparing for the implementation of IFRS 17. We expect the 
adoption of IFRS 17 to affect the timing of earnings recognition for our insurance contracts and the carrying amount of our 
insurance contract liabilities. We continue to assess the impacts of adopting IFRS 17 on our Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Controls and procedures  

Disclosure controls and procedures 
Our disclosure controls and procedures are designed to provide reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed 
by us in reports filed or submitted under Canadian and U.S. securities laws is recorded, processed, summarized and reported 
within the time periods specified under those laws and include controls and procedures that are designed to ensure that 
information is accumulated and communicated to management, including the President and Chief Executive Officer, and the 
Chief Financial Officer, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. 

As of October 31, 2022, management evaluated, under the supervision of and with the participation of the President and Chief 

Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer, the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures as defined under 
rules adopted by the U.S. SEC. Based on that evaluation, the President and Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer 
concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of October 31, 2022. 

Internal control over financial reporting 
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. Internal control 
over financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the 
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with IFRS. However, because of its inherent limitations, 
internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements on a timely basis. See Management’s Report on 
Internal Control over Financial Reporting and the Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm. 

There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting during the year ended October 31, 2022 that have 

materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 

Related party transactions  

In the ordinary course of business, we provide normal banking services and operational services, and enter into other 
transactions with associated and other related corporations, including our joint venture entities, on terms similar to those 
offered to non-related parties. We grant loans to directors, officers and other employees at rates normally accorded to preferred 
clients. In addition, we offer deferred share and other plans to non-employee directors, executives and certain other key 
employees. For further information, refer to Notes 12 and 26 of our audited 2022 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

117 

Supplementary information  

Selected annual information  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except per share amounts)  

Total revenue  
Net income attributable to:  

Shareholders  
Non-controlling interest  

  

Basic earnings per share  
Diluted earnings per share  
Dividends declared per common shares  
Total assets  
Deposits  

2022  
48,985   $

$

2021  

49,693   $

  
15,794  
13  

  
16,038  
12  

Table 70   

2020  

47,181  
  
11,432  
5  

$

15,807   $

16,050   $

11,437  

$

11.08   $
11.06  
4.96  

7.84  
7.82  
4.29  
$1,917,219   $1,706,323   $1,624,548  
1,011,885  
1,100,831  

11.08   $
11.06  
4.32  

1,208,814  

118

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Net interest income on average assets and liabilities  

Table 71   

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except for percentage amounts) (1)  

2022  

2021     

2022  

2021     

2022  

2021  

Asset purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowed  
Loans (2)  
Canada  
Retail  
Wholesale  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Assets  
Deposits with other banks  

Canada  
U.S.  
Other International  

Securities  
Trading  
Investment, net of applicable allowance  

U.S.  
Other International  

Total interest-earning assets  
Non-interest-bearing deposits with other banks  
Customers’ liability under acceptances  
Other assets  

Total assets  

Liabilities and shareholders’ equity  
Deposits (3)  
Canada  
U.S.  
Other International  

loaned  

Subordinated debentures  
Other interest-bearing liabilities  

Total interest-bearing liabilities  
Non-interest-bearing deposits  
Acceptances  
Other liabilities  

Total liabilities  

Equity  

Obligations related to securities sold short  
Obligations related to assets sold under repurchase agreements and securities  

Average balances  

  

Interest  

  

Average rate  

  
  

     
     

$

13,119   $
81,962  
22,819  

10,580     $
56,973     
22,244     

  
  
582   $
911  
204  

  
  

     
     

  
  
106      4.44%   1.00%  
0.11  
1.11  
0.61  
0.89  

63     
136     

117,900  

89,797     

1,697  

305     

1.44  

0.34  

  
135,117  
150,384  

     
128,977     
131,612     

  
4,754  
2,308  

     
3,736     
1,141     

  
3.52  
1.53  

  
2.90  
0.87  

285,501  

260,589     

7,062  

4,877     

2.47  

1.87  

1.51  
  
  
3.16  
5.19  

3.52  
2.95  
4.11  

2.66  
–  
–  
–  

0.41  
  
  
3.09  
4.09  

3.26  
2.61  
3.84  

2.09  
–  
–  
–  

360,068  
  
  
478,696  
103,034  

581,730  
136,937  
49,630  

317,997     
     
     
441,380     
86,978     

528,358     
110,314     
40,619     

5,447  
  
  
15,146  
5,344  

20,490  
4,037  
2,038  

1,309     
     
     
13,658     
3,557     

17,215     
2,880     
1,559     

768,297  

679,291     

26,565  

21,654     

3.46  

3.19  

1,531,766  
99,564  
18,354  
237,167  

1,347,674     
120,154     
19,410     
190,963     

40,771  
–  
–  
–  

28,145     
–     
–     
–     

$ 1,886,851   $ 1,678,200     $ 40,771   $ 28,145      2.16%   1.68%  

  
  

  
  

     
     

  
  
626,549     $ 8,660   $ 4,700      1.27%   0.75%  
0.17  
132,833     
0.53  
97,355     

1,044  
1,047  

231     
517     

0.68  
1.04  

     
     

  
  

$

684,452   $
153,039  
101,058  

938,549  

856,737     

10,751  

5,448     

1.15  

0.64  

39,079  

33,566     

2,409  

1,809     

6.16  

5.39  

315,871  
10,133  
26,000  

1,329,632  
226,376  
18,409  
209,890  

275,870     
9,174     
23,486     

1,198,833     
202,316     
19,516     
165,286     

4,351  
288  
255  

18,054  
–  
–  
–  

574     
179     
133     

8,143     
–     
–     
–     

1.38  
2.84  
0.98  

1.36  
–  
–  
–  

0.21  
1.95  
0.57  

0.68  
–  
–  
–  

$ 1,784,307   $ 1,585,951     $ 18,054   $ 8,143      1.01%   0.51%  

$

102,544   $

92,250     

n.a.  

n.a.     

n.a.  

n.a.  

$ 1,886,851   $ 1,678,200     $ 18,054   $ 8,143      0.96%   0.49%  

$ 1,886,851   $ 1,678,200     $ 22,717   $ 20,002      1.20%   1.19%  

  

$

870,147   $
437,357  
224,261  

  

     

  
793,130     $ 15,761   $ 13,947      1.81%   1.76%  
1.27  
349,840     
0.79  
204,706     

4,447     
1,608     

5,423  
1,533  

1.24  
0.68  

     

  

$ 1,531,765   $ 1,347,676     $ 22,717   $ 20,002      1.48%   1.48%  

Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity  

Net interest income and margin  

Net interest income and margin (average earning assets, net) (4)  

Canada  
U.S.  
Other International  

Total  

Insurance segment assets and liabilities are included in Other assets and Other liabilities, respectively. 
Interest income includes loan fees of $1,033 million (2021 – $888 million; 2020 – $797 million). 

(1) 
(2) 
(3)  Deposits include personal chequing and savings deposits with average balances of $279 billion (2021 – $258 billion; 2020 – $218 billion), interest expense of $712 million 

(2021 – $175 million; 2020 – $498 million) and average rates of 0.26% (2021 – 0.07%; 2020 – 0.2%). Deposits also include term deposits with average balances of $500 billion 
(2021 – $437 billion; 2020 – $443 billion), interest expense of $7,323 million (2021 – $4,487 million; 2020 – $6,774 million) and average rates of 1.46% (2021 – 1.03%; 
2020 – 1.53%). 

(4)  Geographic classification for selected assets and liabilities is based on the domicile of the booking point of the subject assets and liabilities. 
n.a.  not applicable 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

119 

Change in net interest income  

Table 72   

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars) (1)  

Assets  
Deposits with other banks  

Canada (3)  
U.S. (3)  
Other international (3)  

Securities  
Trading  
Investment, net of applicable allowance  
Asset purchased under reverse repurchase  

agreements and securities borrowed  

Loans  

Canada (3)  
Retail (3)  
Wholesale (3)  

U.S. (3)  
Other international (3)  

Total interest income  

Liabilities  
Deposits  

Canada (3)  
U.S. (3)  
Other international (3)  

Obligations related to securities sold short  
Obligations related to assets sold under repurchase  

agreements and securities loaned  

Subordinated debentures  
Other interest-bearing liabilities  

Total interest expense  

Net interest income  

2022 vs. 2021  

2021 vs. 2020  

Increase (decrease) due to  
changes in  

Increase (decrease) due to  
changes in  

     

  

Average  
volume (2)  

Average  
rate (2)  

Net change     

Average  
volume (2)  

Average  
rate (2)  

Net change  

  
  
25   $
28  
4  
  
178  
163  

  
  
451   $
820  
64  
  
840  
1,004  

    
    
476     $
848    
68    
    
1,018    
1,167    

  
  
(27)   $
93  
–  
  
(95)  
51  

173  
  
  
1,155  
657  
695  
346  

  
  
434  
35  
20  
297  

83  
19  
14  

3,965  
  
  
333  
1,130  
462  
133  

  
  
3,526  
778  
510  
303  

3,694  
90  
108  

4,138    
    
    
1,488    
1,787    
1,157    
479    

    
    
3,960    
813    
530    
600    

3,777    
109    
122    

(583)  
  
  
1,343  
(281)  
(44)  
116  

  
  
167  
167  
30  
(145)  

(279)  
(10)  
(10)  

  
  
18   $

(190)  
104  
  
(791)  
(776)  

(2,776)  
  
  
(2,219)  
(341)  
(110)  
(230)  

  
  
(2,845)  
(594)  
(260)  
(246)  

(1,769)  
(91)  
(20)  

  
  
(9)  
(97)  
104  
  
(886)  
(725)  

(3,359)  
  
  
(876)  
(622)  
(154)  
(114)  

  
  
(2,678)  
(427)  
(230)  
(391)  

(2,048)  
(101)  
(30)  

902   $ 9,009   $ 9,911     $

(80)   $ (5,825)   $ (5,905)  

2,522   $

193   $ 2,715     $

653   $ (1,486)   $

(833)  

$

3,424   $ 9,202   $ 12,626     $

573   $ (7,311)   $ (6,738)  

$

$

$

Insurance segment assets and liabilities are included in Other assets and Other liabilities, respectively. 
Volume/rate variance is allocated on the percentage relationships of changes in balances and changes in rates to the total net change in net interest income. 

(1) 
(2) 
(3)  Geographic classification for selected assets and liabilities is based on the domicile of the booking point of the subject assets and liabilities. 

Loans and acceptances by geography  

As at October 31 (Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Canada (1)  

Residential mortgages  
Personal  
Credit cards  
Small business  

Retail  
Wholesale   

  

U.S. (1)  

Retail  
Wholesale   

Other International (1)  

Retail  
Wholesale   

  

  

Total loans and acceptances  

Total allowance for credit losses  

Total loans and acceptances, net of allowance for credit losses  

(1)  Geographic information is based on residence of borrower. 

120

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Table 73   

2022  

2021  

  

  
$ 383,797   $ 354,169  
78,232  
17,235  
12,003  

79,422  
19,778  
12,669  

495,666  
126,751  

461,639  
107,750  

$ 622,417   $ 569,389  

162,201  

121,642  

  
47,402  
114,799  

  
6,683  
50,289  

56,972  

  
35,601  
86,041  

  
6,358  
44,148  

50,506  

$ 841,590   $ 741,537  

(3,798)  

(4,164)  

$ 837,792   $ 737,373  

Loans and acceptances by portfolio and sector  

As at October 31 (Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Residential mortgages  
Personal  
Credit cards  
Small business   

Retail  

Agriculture  
Automotive  
Banking  
Consumer discretionary  
Consumer staples  
Oil and gas  
Financial services  
Financing products  
Forest products  
Governments  
Industrial products  
Information technology  
Investments  
Mining and metals  
Public works and infrastructure  
Real estate and related  
Other services  
Telecommunication and media  
Transportation  
Utilities  
Other sectors  

Wholesale   

Total loans and acceptances  

Total allowance for credit losses  

Total loans and acceptances, net of allowance for credit losses  

Table 74   

2022  

2021  

$ 418,796   $ 380,332  
93,441  
17,822  
12,003  

97,709  
20,577  
12,669  

$ 549,751   $ 503,598  

10,105  
8,770  
7,016  
19,405  
6,940  
5,959  
41,353  
13,781  
1,094  
5,632  
10,537  
5,232  
19,952  
2,223  
3,006  
79,506  
24,393  
7,176  
6,542  
11,847  
1,370  

9,250  
6,198  
7,734  
14,806  
6,142  
5,283  
29,192  
10,273  
931  
6,677  
7,193  
3,569  
19,392  
984  
1,890  
66,798  
20,550  
5,047  
6,251  
8,699  
1,080  

$ 291,839   $ 237,939  

$ 841,590   $ 741,537  

(3,798)  

(4,164)  

$ 837,792   $ 737,373  

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

121 

Gross impaired loans by portfolio and geography  

As at October 31 (Millions of Canadian dollars, except for percentage amounts)  

Residential mortgages  
Personal  
Small business  

Retail  

Agriculture  
Automotive  
Banking  
Consumer discretionary  
Consumer staples  
Oil and gas  
Financial services  
Financing products  
Forest products  
Governments  
Industrial products  
Information technology  
Investments  
Mining and metals  
Public works and infrastructure  
Real estate and related  
Other services  
Telecommunication and media  
Transportation  
Utilities  
Other sectors  

Acquired credit-impaired loans  

Wholesale  

Total GIL (1)  

Canada (2)  

Residential mortgages  
Personal  
Small business  

Retail  

Agriculture  
Automotive  
Banking  
Consumer discretionary  
Consumer staples  
Oil and gas  
Financial services  
Financing products  
Forest products  
Governments  
Industrial products  
Information technology  
Investments  
Mining and metals  
Public works and infrastructure  
Real estate and related  
Other services  
Telecommunication and media  
Transportation  
Utilities  
Other sectors  

Wholesale  

Total  

U.S. (2)  
Retail  
Wholesale  

Total  

Retail  
Wholesale  

Total  

Total GIL   

Other International (2)  

Allowance on impaired loans   

Net impaired loans  

GIL as a % of loans and acceptances  

Residential mortgages  
Personal  
Small business  

Retail  
Wholesale  

Total  

Allowance on impaired loans as a % of GIL   

2022    

Table 75   

2021  
645  
197  
109  

$ 

$ 

1,295     
6     

1,351  

6  

$  2,199      $ 2,308  

$ 

     
352      $
174     
138     
664     

560      $
200     
138     
898     

18      $
9     
1     
254     
122     
57     
96     
–     
7     
3     
77     
5     
9     
12     
16     
322     
246     
8     
6     
–     
27     

17     
6     
1     
69     
40     
10     
4     
–     
7     
3     
28     
3     
2     
4     
7     
88     
56     
5     
6     
–     
–     
356     

951  

11  
8  
–  
274  
32  
131  
77  
–  
4  
25  
35  
5  
31  
3  
6  
314  
220  
6  
137  
–  
32  

  
443  
164  
109  

716  

11  
5  
–  
107  
25  
48  
–  
–  
4  
25  
31  
3  
–  
3  
5  
157  
110  
5  
16  
–  
–  

555  

  
23  
412  

435  

$  1,020      $ 1,271  

     
34      $

674     
708      $

$ 

$ 

$ 

  
212  
390  

     
200      $
271     
471      $
$ 
$  2,199      $ 2,308  
(697)  

(669)    

602  

$  1,530      $ 1,611  
  
     
0.17%  
0.13%     
0.21%  
0.20%     
1.09%     
0.91%  
0.16%     
0.45%     
0.26%     
30.41%     

0.19%  
0.57%  

30.21%  

0.31%  

(1) 

Past due loans greater than 90 days not included in impaired loans were $170 million in 2022 (2021 – $137 million). For further details, refer to Note 5 of our 2022 Annual 
Consolidated Financial Statements. 

(2)  Geographic information is based on residence of borrower. 

122

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Provision for credit losses by portfolio and geography  

For the year ended October 31 (Millions of Canadian dollars, except for percentage amounts)  

Residential mortgages  
Personal  
Credit cards  
Small business  

Retail  

Agriculture  
Automotive  
Banking  
Consumer discretionary  
Consumer staples  
Oil and gas  
Financial services  
Financing products  
Forest products  
Governments  
Industrial products  
Information technology  
Investments  
Mining and metals  
Public works and infrastructure  
Real estate and related  
Other services  
Telecommunication and media  
Transportation  
Utilities  
Other sectors  

Wholesale  

Acquired credit–impaired loans  

Total PCL on impaired loans   

Canada (1)  

Residential mortgages  
Personal  
Credit cards  
Small business  

Retail  

Agriculture  
Automotive  
Banking  
Consumer discretionary  
Consumer staples  
Oil and gas  
Financial services  
Financing products  
Forest products  
Governments  
Industrial products  
Information technology  
Investments  
Mining and metals  
Public works and infrastructure  
Real estate and related  
Other services  
Telecommunication and media  
Transportation  
Utilities  
Other sectors  

Wholesale  

Total  

U.S. (1)  

Retail  
Wholesale  

Total  

Retail  
Wholesale  

Total  

Other International (1)  

Total PCL on impaired loans   

Total PCL on performing loans   

Total PCL on other financial assets  

Total PCL  

2022     

$ 

13      $

Table 76   

2021  
34  
243  
296  
31  

604  

259     
333     
43     

648     

1      $
3     
(3)    
47     
35     
(2)    
3     
–     
1     
(1)    
(6)    
(8)    
3     
9     
5     
32     
25     
(1)    
(16)    
1     
3     

131     

(1)    

778      $

     
15      $

271     
326     
43     

655     

1     
3     
1     
36     
9     
(21)    
1     
–     
1     
(1)    
9     
1     
2     
2     
–     
23     
9     
1     
1     
–     
–     

78     

733      $

     
2      $

68     

70      $

     
(9)     $

(16)    

(25)     $

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

(5)  
(5)  
–  
7  
(14)  
(51)  
2  
–  
(5)  
2  
2  
24  
(3)  
(5)  
2  
30  
53  
9  
32  
(1)  
(1)  

73  

1  

678  

  
24  
254  
288  
31  

597  

(4)  
(5)  
–  
11  
–  
(19)  
–  
–  
(5)  
2  
2  
2  
–  
–  
2  
26  
62  
2  
10  
–  
–  

86  

683  

  
7  
(10)  

(3)  

  
–  
(2)  

(2)  

778      $

678  

(281)    

(1,350)  

(13)    

(81)  

$ 

484      $

(753)  

0.06%     

(0.10)%  

0.10%     

0.10%  

PCL on loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances  

PCL on impaired loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances (1)  

(1)  Geographic information is based on residence of borrower. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

123 

Allowance on loans by portfolio and geography (1)  

As at and for the year ended October 31 (Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts)  

Allowance against impaired loans   
Canada (2)  

Residential mortgages  
Personal  
Small business  

Retail  

Agriculture  
Automotive  
Banking  
Consumer discretionary  
Consumer staples  
Oil and gas  
Financial services  
Financing products  
Forest products  
Governments  
Industrial products  
Information technology  
Investments  
Mining and metals  
Public works and infrastructure  
Real estate and related  
Other services  
Telecommunication and media  
Transportation  
Utilities  
Other sectors  

Wholesale  

Total  

U.S. (2)  

Retail  
Wholesale  

Total  

Retail  
Wholesale  

Total  

Other International (2)  

Total allowance on impaired loans   

Allowance on performing loans   

Residential mortgages  
Personal  
Credit cards  
Small business  

Retail  

Wholesale  

Total allowance on performing loans   

Total allowance on loans  

Key ratios  

Allowance on loans as a % of loans and acceptances  
Net write-offs as a % of average net loans and acceptances  

Includes loans, acceptances, and commitments. 

(1) 
(2)  Geographic information is based on residence of borrower. 

124

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

  
  
45  
71  
34  

3  
1  
–  
9  
5  
29  
–  
–  
1  
3  
9  
1  
–  
1  
2  
27  
81  
1  
9  
–  
–  

182  

332  

  
3  
126  

129  

  
107  
129  

236  

697  

  
278  
991  
875  
143  

Table 77   

2022     

2021  

$ 

$ 

$  177      $

150  

     
     
44      $
85     
48     

2      $
4     
–     
27     
10     
7     
1     
–     
1     
1     
12     
2     
1     
2     
4     
25     
12     
1     
3     
–     
–     

$  115      $

$  292      $

$  177      $

     
2      $

175     

     
98      $

102     

$ 

$ 

$  200      $

$  669      $

     

$  300      $
946     
893     
146     

$  2,285      $ 2,287  

$  1,227      $ 1,435  

$  3,512      $ 3,722  

$  4,181      $ 4,419  

     
0.50%     
0.10%     

  
0.60%  
0.11%  

Credit quality information by Canadian province (1)  

As at and for the year ended October 31 (Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Total loans and acceptances in Canada  

Loans and acceptances   
Atlantic provinces (2)  
Quebec  
Ontario  
Alberta  
Other Prairie provinces (3)  
B.C. and territories (4)  

Gross impaired loans   
Atlantic provinces (2)  
Quebec  
Ontario  
Alberta  
Other Prairie provinces (3)  
B.C. and territories (4)  

Total GIL in Canada  

PCL on impaired loans   
Atlantic provinces (2)  
Quebec  
Ontario  
Alberta  
Other Prairie provinces (3)  
B.C. and territories (4)  

Total PCL on impaired loans in Canada  

(1)  Geographic information is based on residence of borrower. 
(2)  Comprises Newfoundland and Labrador, Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick. 
(3)  Comprises Manitoba and Saskatchewan. 
(4)  Comprises British Columbia, Nunavut, Northwest Territories and Yukon. 

Table 78   

2021  

2022    
  
    
$  30,709     $ 29,078  
68,595  
268,317  
71,506  
33,956  
97,937  

73,743    
300,477    
73,638    
35,699    
108,151    

$ 622,417     $ 569,389  

1,020     $

1,271  

    
65     $

172    
323    
233    
121    
106    

    
20     $
47    
529    
48    
39    
50    

733     $

  
97  
198  
379  
321  
173  
103  

  
22  
22  
483  
83  
39  
34  

683  

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

125 

Glossary  

Acceptances 
A bill of exchange or negotiable instrument 
drawn by the borrower for payment at 
maturity and accepted by a bank. The 
acceptance constitutes a guarantee of 
payment by the bank and can be traded in the 
money market. The bank earns a “stamping 
fee” for providing this guarantee. 

Allowance for credit losses (ACL) 
The amount deemed adequate by 
management to absorb expected credit losses 
as at the balance sheet date. The allowance is 
established for all financial assets subject to 
impairment assessment, including certain 
loans, debt securities, customers’ liability 
under acceptances, financial guarantees, and 
undrawn loan commitments. The allowance is 
changed by the amount of provision for credit 
losses recorded, which is charged to income, 
and decreased by the amount of write-offs net 
of recoveries in the period. 

Asset-backed securities (ABS) 
Securities created through the securitization 
of a pool of assets, for example auto loans or 
credit card loans. 

Assets under administration (AUA) 
Assets administered by us, which are 
beneficially owned by clients, unless otherwise 
noted. Services provided in respect of assets 
under administration are of an administrative 
nature, including safekeeping, collecting 
investment income, settling purchase and sale 
transactions, and record keeping. 

Assets under management (AUM) 
Assets managed by us, which are beneficially 
owned by clients, unless otherwise noted. 
Services provided in respect of assets under 
management include the selection of 
investments and the provision of investment 
advice. We have assets under management 
that are also administered by us and included 
in assets under administration. 

Attributed capital 
Attributed capital is based on the Basel III 
regulatory capital requirements and economic 
capital. 

Auction rate securities (ARS) 
Debt securities whose interest rates are 
regularly reset through an auction process. 

Average earning assets, net 
Average earning assets include interest-
bearing deposits with other banks, securities, 
net of applicable allowance, assets purchased 
under reverse repurchase agreements and 
securities borrowed, loans, net of allowance, 
cash collateral and margin deposits. Insurance 
assets, and all other assets not specified are 
excluded. The averages are based on the daily 
balances for the period. 

Basis point (bp) 
One one-hundredth of a percentage point 
(.01%). 

Collateral 
Assets pledged as security for a loan or other 
obligation. Collateral can take many forms, 
such as cash, highly rated securities, property, 
inventory, equipment and receivables. 

Collateralized debt obligation (CDO) 
Securities with multiple tranches that are 
issued by structured entities and 
collateralized by debt obligations including 
bonds and loans. Each tranche offers a varying 
degree of risk and return so as to meet 
investor demand. 

Commercial mortgage-backed securities 
(CMBS) 
Securities created through the securitization 
of commercial mortgages. 

Commitments to extend credit 
Unutilized amount of credit facilities available 
to clients either in the form of loans, bankers’ 
acceptances and other on-balance sheet 
financing, or through off-balance sheet 
products such as guarantees and letters of 
credit. 

Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital 
A regulatory Basel III capital measure 
comprised mainly of common shareholders’ 
equity less regulatory deductions and 
adjustments for goodwill and intangibles, 
defined benefit pension fund assets, shortfall 
in allowances and other specified items. 

Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio 
A risk-based capital measure calculated as 
CET1 capital divided by risk-weighted assets. 

Covered bonds 
Full recourse on-balance sheet obligations 
issued by banks and credit institutions that 
are fully collateralized by assets over which 
investors enjoy a priority claim in the event of 
an issuer’s insolvency. 

Credit default swaps (CDS) 
A derivative contract that provides the 
purchaser with a one-time payment should the 
referenced entity/entities default (or a similar 
triggering event occur). 

Derivative 
A contract between two parties, which 
requires little or no initial investment and 
where payments between the parties are 
dependent upon the movements in price of an 
underlying instrument, index or financial rate. 
Examples of derivatives include swaps, 
options, forward rate agreements and futures. 
The notional amount of the derivative is the 
contract amount used as a reference point to 
calculate the payments to be exchanged 
between the two parties, and the notional 
amount itself is generally not exchanged by 
the parties. 

Dividend payout ratio 
Common dividends as a percentage of net 
income available to common shareholders. 

Dividend yield 
Dividends per common share divided by the 
average of the high and low share price in the 
relevant period. 

Earnings per share (EPS), basic 
Calculated as net income available to common 
shareholders divided by the average number 
of shares outstanding. 

Earnings per share (EPS), diluted 
Calculated as net income available to common 
shareholders divided by the average number 
of shares outstanding adjusted for the dilutive 
effects of stock options and other convertible 
securities. 

Efficiency Ratio 
Non-interest expense as a percentage of total 
revenue. 

Fair value 
Fair value of a financial instrument is the price 
that would be received to sell an asset or paid 
to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction 
between market participants at the 
measurement date. 

Funding Valuation Adjustment 
Funding valuation adjustments are calculated 
to incorporate cost and benefit of funding in 
the valuation of uncollateralized and under-
collateralized OTC derivatives. Future 
expected cash flows of these derivatives are 
discounted to reflect the cost and benefit of 
funding the derivatives by using a funding 
curve, implied volatilities and correlations as 
inputs. 

Guarantees and standby letters of credit 
These primarily represent irrevocable 
assurances that a bank will make payments in 
the event that its client cannot meet its 
financial obligations to third parties. Certain 
other guarantees, such as bid and 
performance bonds, represent non-financial 
undertakings. 

Hedge 
A risk management technique used to mitigate 
exposure from market, interest rate or foreign 
currency exchange risk arising from normal 
banking operations. The elimination or 
reduction of such exposure is accomplished by 
establishing offsetting positions. For example, 
assets denominated in foreign currencies can 
be offset with liabilities in the same currencies 
or through the use of foreign exchange 
hedging instruments such as futures, options 
or foreign exchange contracts. 

Hedge funds 
A type of investment fund, marketed to 
accredited high net worth investors, that is 
subject to limited regulation and restrictions 
on its investments compared to retail mutual 
funds, and that often utilize aggressive 
strategies such as selling short, leverage, 
program trading, swaps, arbitrage and 
derivatives. 

High-quality liquid assets (HQLA) 
Assets are considered to be HQLA if they can 
be easily and immediately converted into cash 
at little or no loss of value during a time of 
stress. 

Impaired loans 
Loans are classified as impaired when there 
has been a deterioration of credit quality to 
the extent that management no longer has 
reasonable assurance of timely collection of 
the full amount of principal and interest in 
accordance with the contractual terms of the 
loan agreement. Credit card balances are not 
classified as impaired as they are directly 
written off after payments are 180 days past 
due. 

International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS) 
IFRS are principles-based standards, 
interpretations and the framework adopted by 
the International Accounting Standards Board. 

Leverage Ratio 
A Basel III regulatory measure, the ratio 
divides Tier 1 capital by the sum of total assets 
plus specified off-balance sheet items. 

Expected credit losses 
The difference between the contractual cash 
flows due to us in accordance with the 
relevant contractual terms and the cash flows 
that we expect to receive, discounted to the 
balance sheet date. 

Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) 
The Liquidity Coverage Ratio is a Basel III 
metric that measures the sufficiency of HQLA 
available to meet net short-term financial 
obligations over a thirty day period in an acute 
stress scenario. 

126

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Loan-to-value (LTV) ratio 
Calculated based on the total facility amount 
for the residential mortgage and RBC 
Homeline Plan® product divided by the value 
of the related residential property. 

RBC Homeline Plan® products 
This is comprised of residential mortgages and 
secured personal loans whereby the borrower 
pledges real estate as collateral. 

Master netting agreement 
An agreement between us and a counterparty 
designed to reduce the credit risk of multiple 
derivative transactions through the creation of 
a legal right of offset of exposure in the event 
of a default. 

Net interest income 
The difference between what is earned on 
assets such as loans and securities and what 
is paid on liabilities such as deposits and 
subordinated debentures. 

Net interest margin (on average earning 
assets, net) 
Calculated as net interest income divided by 
average earning assets, net. 

Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) 
The Net Stable Funding Ratio is a Basel III 
metric that measures the sufficiency of 
available stable funding to meet the minimum 
coverage level of required stable funding. 

Normal course issuer bid (NCIB) 
A program for the repurchase of our own 
shares for cancellation through a stock 
exchange that is subject to the various rules of 
the relevant stock exchange and securities 
commission. 

Notional amount 
The contract amount used as a reference point 
to calculate payments for derivatives. 

Off-balance sheet financial instruments 
A variety of arrangements offered to clients, 
which include credit derivatives, written put 
options, backstop liquidity facilities, stable 
value products, financial standby letters of 
credit, performance guarantees, credit 
enhancements, mortgage loans sold with 
recourse, commitments to extend credit, 
securities lending, documentary and 
commercial letters of credit, sponsor member 
guarantees, securities lending 
indemnifications and indemnifications. 

Office of the Superintendent of Financial 
Institutions Canada (OSFI) 
The primary regulator of federally chartered 
financial institutions and federally 
administered pension plans in Canada. OSFI’s 
mission is to safeguard policyholders, 
depositors and pension plan members from 
undue loss. 

Operating leverage 
The difference between our revenue growth 
rate and non-interest expense growth rate. 

Options 
A contract or a provision of a contract that 
gives one party (the option holder) the right, 
but not the obligation, to perform a specified 
transaction with another party (the option 
issuer or option writer) according to specified 
terms. 

Provision for credit losses (PCL) 
The amount charged to income necessary to 
bring the allowance for credit losses to a level 
determined appropriate by management. This 
includes provisions on performing and 
impaired financial assets. 

PCL on loans ratio 
PCL on loans ratio is calculated using PCL on 
loans as a percentage of average net loans 
and acceptances. 

Repurchase agreements 
These involve the sale of securities for cash 
and the simultaneous repurchase of the 
securities for value at a later date. These 
transactions normally do not constitute 
economic sales and therefore are treated as 
collateralized financing transactions. 

Return on common equity (ROE) 
Net income available to common 
shareholders, expressed as a percentage of 
average common equity. 

Reverse repurchase agreements 
These involve the purchase of securities for 
cash and the simultaneous sale of the 
securities for value at a later date. These 
transactions normally do not constitute 
economic sales and therefore are treated as 
collateralized financing transactions. 

Risk-weighted assets (RWA) 
Assets adjusted by a regulatory risk-weight 
factor to reflect the riskiness of on and 
off-balance sheet exposures. Certain assets 
are not risk-weighted, but deducted from 
capital. The calculation is defined by OSFI’s 
Capital Adequacy Requirements guidelines. 
For more details, refer to the Capital 
management section. 

Securities lending 
Transactions in which the owner of securities 
agrees to lend it under the terms of a 
prearranged contract to a borrower for a fee. 
Collateral for the loan consists of either high 
quality securities or cash and collateral value 
must be at least equal to the market value of 
the loaned securities. Borrowers pay a 
negotiated fee for loans collateralized by 
securities, whereas for cash collateral lenders 
pay borrowers interest at a negotiated rate 
and reinvest the cash collateral to earn a 
return. An intermediary such as a bank often 
acts as agent lender for the owner of the 
security in return for a share of the revenue 
earned by the owner from lending securities. 
Most often, agent lenders indemnify the owner 
against the risk of the borrower’s failure to 
redeliver the loaned securities – counterparty 
credit risk if a borrower defaults and market 
risk if the value of the non-cash collateral 
declines. The agent lender does not indemnify 
against the investment risk of re-investing 
cash collateral which is borne by the owner. 

Securities sold short 
A transaction in which the seller sells 
securities and then borrows the securities in 
order to deliver them to the purchaser upon 
settlement. At a later date, the seller buys 
identical securities in the market to replace 
the borrowed securities. 

Securitization 
The process by which various financial assets 
are packaged into newly issued securities 
backed by these assets. 

Standardized Approach 
Risk weights prescribed by OSFI are used to 
calculate RWA for the credit risk exposures. 
Credit assessments by OSFI-recognized 
external credit rating agencies of S&P, 
Moody’s, Fitch and DBRS are used to risk-
weight our Sovereign and Bank exposures 
based on the standards and guidelines issued 
by OSFI. For our Business and Retail 
exposures, we use the standard risk weights 
prescribed by OSFI. 

Structured entities 
A structured entity is an entity in which voting 
or similar rights are not the dominant factor in 
deciding who controls the entity, such as when 
the activities that significantly affect the 
entity’s returns are directed by means of 
contractual arrangements. Structured entities 
often have restricted activities, narrow and 
well defined objectives, insufficient equity to 
finance their activities, and financing in the 
form of multiple contractually-linked 
instruments. 

Taxable equivalent basis (teb) 
Income from certain specified tax advantaged 
sources (eligible Canadian taxable corporate 
dividends) is increased to a level that would 
make it comparable to income from taxable 
sources. There is an offsetting adjustment in 
the tax provision, thereby generating the same 
after-tax net income. 

Tier 1 capital 
Tier 1 capital comprises predominantly of CET1 
capital, with additional Tier 1 items such as 
preferred shares, limited recourse capital 
notes and non-controlling interests in 
subsidiaries Tier 1 instruments. 

Tier 2 capital 
Tier 2 capital consists mainly of subordinated 
debentures that meet certain criteria, certain 
loan loss allowances and non-controlling 
interests in subsidiaries’ Tier 2 instruments. 

Total Loss Absorbing Capacity (TLAC) 
The aggregate of Tier 1 capital, Tier 2 capital, 
and external TLAC instruments which allow 
conversion in whole or in part into common 
shares under the Canada Deposit Insurance 
Corporation Act and meet all of the eligibility 
criteria under the TLAC guideline. 

TLAC ratio 
The risk-based TLAC ratio is defined as TLAC 
divided by total risk-weighted assets. 

TLAC Leverage Ratio 
The TLAC leverage ratio is defined as TLAC 
divided by the Leverage ratio exposure. 

Total capital and total capital ratio 
Total capital is defined as the total of Tier 1 
and Tier 2 capital. The total capital ratio is 
calculated by dividing total capital by risk-
weighted assets. 

Tranche 
A security class created whereby the risks and 
returns associated with a pool of assets are 
packaged into several classes of securities 
offering different risk and return profiles from 
those of the underlying asset pool. Tranches 
are typically rated by ratings agencies, and 
reflect both the credit quality of underlying 
collateral as well as the level of protection 
based on the tranches’ relative subordination. 

Unattributed capital 
Unattributed capital represents common 
equity in excess of common equity attributed 
to our business segments and is reported in 
the Corporate Support segment. 

Value-at-Risk (VaR) 
A generally accepted risk-measurement 
concept that uses statistical models based on 
historical information to estimate within a 
given level of confidence the maximum loss in 
market value we would experience in our 
trading portfolio from an adverse one-day 
movement in market rates and prices. 

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

127 

EDTF recommendations index  

We aim to present transparent, high-quality risk disclosures by providing disclosures in this 2022 Annual Report and 
Supplementary Financial Information package (SFI), and Pillar 3 Report, in accordance with recommendations from the FSB’s 
Enhanced Disclosure Task Force (EDTF). Information within the SFI and Pillar 3 Report is not and should not be considered 
incorporated by reference into this 2022 Annual Report. 

The following index summarizes our disclosure by EDTF recommendation: 

  

  

Type of Risk  

Recommendation   Disclosure  

Location of disclosure  

Annual Report page  
128  
60-65, 126-127  
58-60  
105-110  

SFI page  
1  
–  
–  
–  

General  

Risk governance,  
risk management  
and business  
model  

Capital adequacy  
and risk-weighted  
assets (RWA)  

Liquidity  

Funding  

Market risk  

Credit risk  

  

1  
2  
3  
4  

5  
6  
7  
8  

9  

10  

11  

12  
13  
14  

15  

16  

17  
18  

19  

20  

21  
22  

23  
24  
25  

26  
  

27  
28  

29  

30  

31  
32  

Basel back-testing  
Quantitative and qualitative analysis of our  

63, 66-67  
83-84, 88-89  

Table of contents for EDTF risk disclosure  
Define risk terminology and measures  
Top and emerging risks  
New regulatory ratios  

Risk management organization  
Risk culture  
Risk in the context of our business activities  
Stress testing  

Minimum Basel III capital ratios and  

Domestic systemically important bank  
surcharge  

Composition of capital and reconciliation of  

the accounting balance sheet to the  
regulatory balance sheet  

Flow statement of the movements in  

regulatory capital  

Capital strategic planning  
RWA by business segments  
Analysis of capital requirement, and related  

measurement model information  

RWA credit risk and related risk  

Movement of risk-weighted assets by risk  

measurements  

type  

liquidity reserve  

Encumbered and unencumbered assets by  
balance sheet category, and contractual  
obligations for rating downgrades  
Maturity analysis of consolidated total  

assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet  
commitments analyzed by remaining  
contractual maturity at the balance sheet  
date  

Sources of funding and funding strategy  
Relationship between the market risk  

measures for trading and non-trading  
portfolios and the balance sheet  
Decomposition of market risk factors  
Market risk validation and back-testing  
Primary risk management techniques  
beyond reported risk measures and  
parameters  

Bank’s credit risk profile  
Quantitative summary of aggregate credit  
risk exposures that reconciles to the  
balance sheet  

Policies for identifying impaired loans  
Reconciliation of the opening and closing  

balances of impaired loans and  
impairment allowances during the year  
Quantification of gross notional exposure  
for OTC derivatives or exchange-traded  
derivatives  

Credit risk mitigation, including collateral  

held for all sources of credit risk  

60-65  
60-65  
113  
63-64, 76  

105-110  

–  

–  

–  

–  

105-110  
–  
66-69  

84, 87  

91-92  

84-86  
80-81  

76-81  
76  
76-79  

71  

69-70  

Other  

Other risk types  
Publicly known risk events  

94-104  
98-99, 219-220  

* 

These disclosure requirements are satisfied or partially satisfied by disclosures provided in our Pillar 3 Report for the quarter ended October 31, 2022 and for the year 
ended October 31, 2021. 

128

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Index for Enhanced Disclosure Task Force recommendations 

66-75, 175-182  
120-125  

22-32, *  
*  

68-70, 115, 147-149  
–  

–  
24, 29  

–  
–  
–  
–  

–  

*  

20  

–  
21  
*  

*  

21  

32  
–  

–  

–  

–  
–  

–  
–  
–  

33  

*  

–  
–  

REPORTS AND CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  

   Reports  

   130   Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting  

   Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements  

   143   Note 1   General information  

   130   Management’s Report on Internal Control over  

   143   Note 2  

Financial Reporting   

Summary of significant accounting  
policies, estimates and judgments  

   131   Independent Auditor’s Report   

   158   Note 3  

Fair value of financial instruments  

   135   Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting  

   171   Note 4  

Securities  

Firm (PCAOB ID 271)  

   Consolidated Financial Statements  

   138   Consolidated Balance Sheets   

   139   Consolidated Statements of Income   

   140   Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income   

   141   Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity   

   142   Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows   

   175   Note 5  

Loans and allowance for credit losses  

   182   Note 6  

Significant acquisition  

   182   Note 7   Derecognition of financial assets  

   183   Note 8  

Structured entities  

   187   Note 9   Derivative financial instruments and  
hedging activities  

   197   Note 10   Premises and equipment  

   198   Note 11   Goodwill and other intangible assets  

   200   Note 12  

Joint ventures and associated companies  

   200   Note 13   Other assets  

   201   Note 14   Deposits  

   201   Note 15  

Insurance  

   204   Note 16   Segregated funds  

   204   Note 17   Employee benefits – Pension and other  

post-employment benefits  

   209   Note 18   Other liabilities  

   209   Note 19   Subordinated debentures  

   210   Note 20   Equity  

   212   Note 21   Share-based compensation  

   214   Note 22  

Income taxes  

   216   Note 23   Earnings per share  

   217   Note 24   Guarantees, commitments, pledged  

assets and contingencies  

   219   Note 25   Legal and regulatory matters  

   220   Note 26   Related party transactions  

   222   Note 27   Results by business segment  

   223   Note 28   Nature and extent of risks arising from  

financial instruments   

   224   Note 29   Capital management  

   225   Note 30   Offsetting financial assets and financial  

liabilities  

   227   Note 31   Recovery and settlement of on-balance  

sheet assets and liabilities  

   228   Note 32   Parent company information  

   229   Note 33   Subsequent events  

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

129 

Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting  

The accompanying consolidated financial statements of Royal Bank of Canada were prepared by management, which is 
responsible for the integrity and fairness of the information presented, including the many amounts that must of necessity be 
based on estimates and judgments. These consolidated financial statements were prepared in accordance with the Bank Act 
(Canada) and International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board. Financial 
information appearing throughout our Management’s Discussion and Analysis is consistent with these consolidated financial 
statements. 

Our internal controls are designed to provide reasonable assurance that transactions are authorized, assets are 

safeguarded and proper records are maintained. These controls include quality standards in hiring and training of employees, 
policies and procedures manuals, a corporate code of conduct and accountability for performance within appropriate and well-
defined areas of responsibility. 

The system of internal controls is further supported by a compliance function, which is designed to ensure that we and our 

employees comply with securities legislation and conflict of interest rules, and by an internal audit staff, which conducts periodic 
audits of all aspects of our operations. 

The Board of Directors oversees management’s responsibilities for financial reporting through an Audit Committee, which is 

composed entirely of independent directors. This Committee reviews our consolidated financial statements and recommends 
them to the Board for approval. Other key responsibilities of the Audit Committee include reviewing our existing internal control 
procedures and planned revisions to those procedures, and advising the directors on auditing matters and financial reporting 
issues. Our Chief Compliance Officer and Chief Internal Auditor have full and unrestricted access to the Audit Committee. 

The Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions Canada (OSFI) examines and inquires into our business and affairs 

as deemed necessary to determine whether the provisions of the Bank Act are being complied with, and that we are in sound 
financial condition. In carrying out its mandate, OSFI strives to protect the rights and interests of our depositors and creditors. 
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm appointed by our shareholders upon the 

recommendation of the Audit Committee and Board, has performed an independent audit of the consolidated financial 
statements in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards and the standards of the Public Company 
Accounting Oversight Board (United States) as stated in their Independent Auditor’s Report and Report of Independent 
Registered Public Accounting Firm, respectively. The auditors have full and unrestricted access to the Audit Committee to discuss 
their audit and related findings. 

David I. McKay 
President and Chief Executive Officer 

Nadine Ahn 
Chief Financial Officer 

Toronto, November 29, 2022 

Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting  

Management of Royal Bank of Canada is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial 
reporting. Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed by, or under the supervision of, the President and Chief 
Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer and effected by the Board of Directors, management and other personnel to provide 
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external 
purposes in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the International Accounting Standards 
Board. It includes those policies and procedures that: 

(cid:129) Pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions related to and 

dispositions of our assets; 

(cid:129) Provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in 
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and our receipts and expenditures are made only in accordance 
with authorizations of our management and directors; and 

(cid:129) Provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of our 

assets that could have a material effect on our financial statements. 

Due to its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements on a timely 
basis. Also, projections of any evaluation of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting to future periods are 
subject to the risk that the controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance 
with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. 

Management evaluated, under the supervision of and with the participation of the President and Chief Executive Officer and 

Chief Financial Officer, the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of October 31, 2022, based on the 
criteria set forth in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the 
Treadway Commission. Based on that evaluation, management concluded that, as of October 31, 2022, internal control over 
financial reporting was effective based on the criteria established in the Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013). 

The effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of October 31, 2022, has been audited by 

PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm, as stated in their Report of Independent 
Registered Public Accounting Firm, which appears herein. 

David I. McKay 
President and Chief Executive Officer 

Nadine Ahn 
Chief Financial Officer 

Toronto, November 29, 2022 

130

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Independent Auditor’s Report  

To the Shareholders and Board of Directors of Royal Bank of Canada 

Our opinion 
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position 
of Royal Bank of Canada and its subsidiaries (together, the Bank) as of October 31, 2022 and 2021, and its financial performance 
and its cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the 
International Accounting Standards Board (IFRS). 

What we have audited 
The Bank’s consolidated financial statements comprise: 
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)

the consolidated balance sheets as of October 31, 2022 and 2021; 
the consolidated statements of income for the years then ended; 
the consolidated statements of comprehensive income for the years then ended; 
the consolidated statements of changes in equity for the years then ended; 
the consolidated statements of cash flows for the years then ended; and 
the notes to the consolidated financial statements, which include significant accounting policies and other explanatory 
information. 

Certain required disclosures have been presented elsewhere in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis, rather than in the 
notes to the consolidated financial statements. These disclosures are cross-referenced from the consolidated financial 
statements and are identified as audited. 

Basis for opinion 
We conducted our audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards. Our responsibilities under those 
standards are further described in the Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the consolidated financial statements section of 
our report. 

We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. 

Independence 
We are independent of the Bank in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the consolidated 
financial statements in Canada. We have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements. 

Key audit matters 
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional judgment, were of most significance in our audit of the consolidated 
financial statements for the year ended October 31, 2022. These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the 
consolidated financial statements as a whole, and in forming our opinion thereon, and we do not provide a separate opinion on 
these matters. 

Key audit matter  
Allowance for Credit Losses for Financial Assets  
Categorized as Stage 1 and Stage 2 (Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL)  
Refer to Note 2 - Summary of significant accounting policies,  
estimates and judgments, Note 4 - Securities and Note 5 - Loans  
and allowance for credit losses to the consolidated financial  
statements.  

The Bank’s allowance for credit losses for financial assets was  
$4,214 million as of October 31, 2022 and represents  
management’s estimate of expected credit losses on financial  
assets as of the balance sheet date, of which a significant  
portion relates to financial assets categorized as Stage 1 and  
Stage 2. Performing financial assets are categorized as Stage 1  
from initial recognition to the date on which the asset has  
experienced a significant increase in credit risk relative to its  
initial recognition. Performing financial assets transfer into  
Stage 2 following a significant increase in credit risk relative to  
the initial recognition. Financial assets are categorized as  
Stage 3 when considered to be credit-impaired. As disclosed by  
management, the measurement of expected credit losses is a  
complex calculation that involves a large number of  
interrelated inputs and assumptions such as borrower risk  
ratings, forward-looking macroeconomic conditions, scenario  
design and the weights assigned to each scenario. The  
probability of default, loss given default and exposure at  
default inputs are modelled based on the macroeconomic  
variables that are most closely correlated with credit losses.  

Management’s estimation of expected credit losses in Stage 1  
and Stage 2 considers five distinct future macroeconomic  

How our audit addressed the key audit matter  

Our approach to addressing the matter included the following  
procedures, among others:  

(cid:129) Testing the effectiveness of controls relating to the  
estimation of the Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL, including  
controls over:  

The probability of default, loss given default and  
exposure at default models.  
The design of future macroeconomic scenarios, the  
forecasting of certain macroeconomic variables, and  
the probability-weighting of these scenarios.  
The assignment of borrower risk ratings.  
The completeness and accuracy of certain data  
inputs underlying the Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL  
calculation.  

(cid:129) Testing management’s process for estimating the Stage 1  

and Stage 2 ACL, which consisted of:  

Testing the completeness and accuracy of certain  
underlying data used in the estimation of the Stage 1  
and Stage 2 ACL.  
Using professionals with specialized skill and  
knowledge to assist in evaluating:  
(cid:129)

The appropriateness of the probability of default,  
loss given default and exposure at default  
models used in the estimation of the Stage 1 and  
Stage 2 ACL.  

O

O

O

O

O

O

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

131 

How our audit addressed the key audit matter  

(cid:129)

The reasonableness of significant inputs and  
assumptions used in the estimation of the Stage 1  
and Stage 2 ACL related to:  

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

The design of future macroeconomic  
scenarios.  
Certain forecasted macroeconomic  
variables.  
The probability-weights assigned to the  
scenarios.  
The assignment of borrower risk ratings for  
samples of loans.  

Our approach to addressing the matter included the following  
procedures, among others:  

(cid:129) Testing the effectiveness of controls relating to  

management’s goodwill impairment test, including controls  
over the determination of the recoverable amount of the  
Caribbean Banking CGU.  

(cid:129) Testing management’s process for determining the  
recoverable amount of the CGU, which consisted of:  

O

O

O

O

O

Evaluating the appropriateness of the discounted  
cash flow model.  
Testing the completeness and accuracy of certain  
underlying data used in the model.  
Evaluating the reasonableness of certain  
assumptions used by management, related to future  
cash flows, which involved evaluating the  
consistency with:  
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
Evaluating consistency of the recoverable amount  
with market comparable transactions.  
Professionals with specialized skill and knowledge  
assisted us in evaluating:  
(cid:129)

Current and past performance of the CGU.  
External market and industry data.  

The appropriateness of management’s  
discounted cash flow model.  
The consistency of the recoverable amount of the  
CGU with market comparable transactions.  

(cid:129)

Key audit matter  
scenarios, each of which includes a forecast of relevant  
macroeconomic variables, designed to capture a wide range of  
possible outcomes and which are probability-weighted  
according to management’s expectation of the relative  
likelihood of the range of outcomes that each scenario  
represents at the reporting date. Significant management  
judgment is required in making assumptions and estimations  
when calculating the Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL.  

We considered this a key audit matter due to:  

(cid:129) The significant judgment required by management when  

estimating the Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL.  

(cid:129) A high degree of auditor judgment and subjectivity in  
performing procedures related to management’s  
assumptions for:  

O

O

O

O

Designing future macroeconomic scenarios.  
Forecasting certain macroeconomic variables.  
Probability-weighting scenarios.  
Assigning borrower risk ratings.  

(cid:129) The significant audit effort necessary to evaluate audit  

evidence as the estimation of the Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL is a  
complex calculation that involves a large volume of data,  
interrelated inputs and assumptions, some of which are  
model-based.  

(cid:129) The audit effort involved the use of professionals with  

specialized skill and knowledge.  

Goodwill Impairment Assessment of the Caribbean Banking  
Cash Generating Unit (CGU)  
Refer to Note 2 - Summary of significant accounting policies,  
estimates and judgments and Note 11 - Goodwill and other  
intangible assets to the consolidated financial statements.  

The goodwill allocated to the Caribbean Banking CGU was  
$1,759 million. Management conducts a goodwill impairment  
test as of August 1 of each year by comparing the carrying  
amount of each CGU to its recoverable amount. The  
recoverable amount of a CGU is represented by its value in use  
(VIU), except in circumstances where the carrying amount of a  
CGU exceeds its VIU. In such cases, the greater of the CGU’s  
fair value less costs of disposal (FVLCD) and its VIU is the  
recoverable amount.  

Management estimated the recoverable amount of the  
Caribbean Banking CGU based on its FVLCD. Management  
calculated the FVLCD using a discounted cash flow method  
that projects future cash flows over a 5-year period based on  
management forecasts, adjusted to approximate the  
considerations of a prospective third-party buyer. Cash flows  
beyond the initial 5-year period are assumed by management  
to increase at a constant rate using a nominal long-term  
growth rate. The discount rate used to determine the present  
value of the Caribbean Banking CGU’s projected future cash  
flows is based on the bank-wide cost of capital, adjusted for  
the risks to which the CGU is exposed.  

As of August 1, 2022, management determined that the  
recoverable amount was 109% of its carrying amount.  
Management also considered reasonably possible alternative  
scenarios, including market comparable transactions, which  
yielded valuations ranging from an immaterial deficit to an  
immaterial surplus.  

Management uses significant judgment to determine inputs to  
the discounted cash flow model. If the future cash flows and  
other assumptions in future periods deviate significantly from  
the current amounts used in management’s impairment  
testing, the value of goodwill could become impaired.  

132

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Key audit matter  
We considered this a key audit matter due to:  

How our audit addressed the key audit matter  

  

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

The significant judgment required by management  
when determining the recoverable amount of the CGU,  
including projecting future cash flows.  
A high degree of auditor judgment and subjectivity in  
performing procedures and evaluating audit evidence  
related to management’s calculation of the  
recoverable amount of the CGU.  
The audit effort involved the use of professionals with  
specialized skill and knowledge.  

Uncertain Tax Positions  
Refer to Note 2 - Summary of significant accounting policies,  
estimates and judgments and Note 22 - Income taxes to the  
consolidated financial statements.  

The Bank is subject to income tax laws in various jurisdictions  
where it operates and the complex tax laws are potentially  
subject to different interpretations by management and the  
relevant taxation authorities. As disclosed by management,  
significant judgment is required in the interpretation of the  
relevant tax laws, and in assessing the probability of  
acceptance of the Bank’s tax positions to determine tax  
provisions, which includes management’s best estimate of  
uncertain tax positions that are under audit or appeal by the  
relevant taxation authorities. Management performs a review  
on a quarterly basis to incorporate its best assessment based  
on information available, but additional liability and income  
tax expense could result based on the acceptance of the Bank’s  
tax positions by the relevant tax authorities.  

In some cases, the Bank has received reassessments denying  
the tax deductibility of dividends from transactions including  
those with Tax Indifferent Investors.  

We considered this a key audit matter due to:  

(cid:129) The significant judgment required by management, including  

O

O

a high degree of estimation uncertainty, when:  
Interpreting the relevant tax laws.  
Assessing the probability of acceptance of the Bank’s  
tax positions, which includes management’s best  
estimate of uncertain tax positions that are under  
audit or appeal by relevant taxation authorities.  

(cid:129) A high degree of auditor judgment and subjectivity in  

performing procedures and evaluating the uncertain tax  
positions.  

(cid:129) The audit effort involved the use of professionals with  

specialized skill and knowledge.  

Our approach to addressing the matter included the following  
procedures, among others:  

(cid:129) Testing the effectiveness of controls relating to the  

evaluation of uncertain tax positions and the impact on tax  
provisions.  

(cid:129) Testing management’s process for (i) assessing the  

probability of acceptance of the Bank’s tax positions; and  
(ii) estimating provisions relating to uncertain tax positions,  
if applicable, which reflects management’s best estimate of  
uncertain tax positions that are under audit or appeal by  
relevant taxation authorities. This consisted of:  

Evaluating the appropriateness of the methods used.  
Testing the completeness and accuracy of underlying  
data used in the estimate.  
Reviewing correspondence with relevant taxation  
authorities.  

O Making inquiries of the Bank’s internal and external  

legal counsel.  
Evaluating, with the assistance of professionals with  
specialized skill and knowledge:  
(cid:129)
(cid:129)

Application of relevant tax laws.  
The reasonableness of management’s  
assessment of whether it is probable that the  
relevant tax authorities will accept the Bank’s tax  
positions.  
Evidence used by management.  

(cid:129)

O

O

O

O

Other information 
Management is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the Management’s Discussion and 
Analysis and the information, other than the consolidated financial statements and our auditor’s report thereon, included in the 
annual report. 

Our opinion on the consolidated financial statements does not cover the other information and we do not express any form of 
assurance conclusion thereon. 

In connection with our audit of the consolidated financial statements, our responsibility is to read the other information 
identified above and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the consolidated 
financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise appears to be materially misstated. 

If, based on the work we have performed, we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information, we are 
required to report that fact. We have nothing to report in this regard. 

Responsibilities of management and those charged with governance for the consolidated financial statements 
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated financial statements in accordance 
with IFRS, and for such internal control as management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of consolidated 
financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. 

In preparing the consolidated financial statements, management is responsible for assessing the Bank’s ability to continue as a 
going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting 
unless management either intends to liquidate the Bank or to cease operations, or has no realistic alternative but to do so. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

133 

Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the Bank’s financial reporting process. 

Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the consolidated financial statements 
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements as a whole are free from 
material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes our opinion. Reasonable 
assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with Canadian generally 
accepted auditing standards will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or 
error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the 
economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these consolidated financial statements. 

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

As part of an audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards, we exercise professional judgment and 
maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. We also: 
(cid:129)

Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to fraud or 
error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and 
appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is 
higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, 
or the override of internal control. 
Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in 
the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Bank’s internal control. 
Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related 
disclosures made by management. 
Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting and, based on the audit 
evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on 
the Bank’s ability to continue as a going concern. If we conclude that a material uncertainty exists, we are required to draw 
attention in our auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the consolidated financial statements or, if such disclosures are 
inadequate, to modify our opinion. Our conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of our auditor’s 
report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Bank to cease to continue as a going concern. 
Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the consolidated financial statements, including the disclosures, 
and whether the consolidated financial statements represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that 
achieves fair presentation. 
Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the financial information of the entities or business activities within 
the Bank to express an opinion on the consolidated financial statements. We are responsible for the direction, supervision 
and performance of the group audit. We remain solely responsible for our audit opinion. 

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

We communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit 
and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that we identify during our audit. 

We also provide those charged with governance with a statement that we have complied with relevant ethical requirements 
regarding independence, and to communicate with them all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be thought to 
bear on our independence, and where applicable, related safeguards. 

From the matters communicated with those charged with governance, we determine those matters that were of most 
significance in the audit of the consolidated financial statements of the current period and are therefore the key audit matters. 
We describe these matters in our auditor’s report unless law or regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter or when, 
in extremely rare circumstances, we determine that a matter should not be communicated in our report because the adverse 
consequences of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such communication. 

The engagement partner on the audit resulting in this independent auditor’s report is Samuel May. 

/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP 

Chartered Professional Accountants, Licensed Public Accountants 

Toronto, Canada 
November 29, 2022 

134

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm  

To the Shareholders and Board of Directors of Royal Bank of Canada 

Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control over Financial Reporting 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Royal Bank of Canada and its subsidiaries (together, the 
Bank) as of October 31, 2022 and 2021, and the related consolidated statements of income, comprehensive income, changes in 
equity and cash flows for the years then ended, including the related notes (collectively referred to as the consolidated financial 
statements). We also have audited the Bank’s internal control over financial reporting as of October 31, 2022, based on criteria 
established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the 
Treadway Commission (COSO). 

In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial 
position of the Bank as of October 31, 2022 and 2021, and its financial performance and its cash flows for the years then ended in 
conformity with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board. Also in 
our opinion, the Bank maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of October 31, 
2022, based on criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the COSO. 

Basis for Opinions 
The Bank’s management is responsible for these consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control 
over financial reporting, and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the 
accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express opinions on 
the Bank’s consolidated financial statements and on the Bank’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audits. We 
are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB) and are 
required to be independent with respect to the Bank in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules 
and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB. 

We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the 
audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, 
whether due to error or fraud, and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material 
respects. 

Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement 
of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. 
Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated 
financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by 
management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. Our audit of internal 
control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the 
risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based 
on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the 
circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions. 

Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting 
An entity’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the 
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally 
accepted accounting principles. An entity’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that 
(i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions 
of the assets of the entity; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation 
of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the 
entity are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the entity; and (iii) provide 
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the entity’s 
assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. 

Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, 
projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate 
because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. 

Critical Audit Matters 
The critical audit matters communicated below are matters arising from the current period audit of the consolidated financial 
statements that were communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that (i) relate to accounts or 
disclosures that are material to the consolidated financial statements and (ii) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or 
complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated 
financial statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matters below, providing separate 
opinions on the critical audit matters or on the accounts or disclosures to which they relate. 

Allowance for Credit Losses for Financial Assets Categorized as Stage 1 and Stage 2 (Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL) 
As described in Notes 2, 4 and 5 to the consolidated financial statements, the Bank’s allowance for credit losses for financial 
assets was $4,214 million as of October 31, 2022 and represents management’s estimate of expected credit losses on financial 
assets as of the balance sheet date, of which a significant portion relates to financial assets categorized as Stage 1 and Stage 2. 
Performing financial assets are categorized as Stage 1 from initial recognition to the date on which the asset has experienced a 
significant increase in credit risk relative to its initial recognition. Performing financial assets transfer into Stage 2 following a 
significant increase in credit risk relative to the initial recognition. Financial assets are categorized as Stage 3 when considered 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

135 

to be credit-impaired. As disclosed by management, the measurement of expected credit losses is a complex calculation that 
involves a large number of interrelated inputs and assumptions such as borrower risk ratings, forward-looking macroeconomic 
conditions, scenario design and the weights assigned to each scenario. The probability of default, loss given default and 
exposure at default inputs are modelled based on the macroeconomic variables that are most closely correlated with credit 
losses. Management’s estimation of expected credit losses in Stage 1 and Stage 2 considers five distinct future macroeconomic 
scenarios, each of which includes a forecast of relevant macroeconomic variables, designed to capture a wide range of possible 
outcomes and which are probability-weighted according to management’s expectation of the relative likelihood of the range of 
outcomes that each scenario represents at the reporting date. Significant management judgment is required in making 
assumptions and estimations when calculating the Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL. 

The principal considerations for our determination that performing procedures relating to the Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL is a critical 
audit matter are (i) the significant judgment required by management when estimating the Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL; (ii) a high 
degree of auditor judgment and subjectivity in performing procedures related to management’s assumptions for (a) designing 
future macroeconomic scenarios, (b) forecasting certain macroeconomic variables, (c) probability-weighting scenarios, and 
(d) assigning borrower risk ratings; (iii) the significant audit effort necessary to evaluate audit evidence as the estimation of the 
Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL is a complex calculation that involves a large volume of data, interrelated inputs and assumptions, some 
of which are model-based; and (iv) the audit effort involved the use of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge. 

Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our overall 
opinion on the consolidated financial statements. These procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls relating to the 
estimation of the Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL, including controls over (i) the probability of default, loss given default and exposure at 
default models; (ii) the design of future macroeconomic scenarios, the forecasting of certain macroeconomic variables, and the 
probability-weighting of these scenarios; (iii) the assignment of borrower risk ratings; and (iv) the completeness and accuracy of 
certain data inputs underlying the Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL calculation. These procedures also included, among others, testing 
management’s process for estimating the Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL. This consisted of (i) testing the completeness and accuracy of 
certain underlying data used in the estimation of the Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL; and (ii) with the assistance of professionals with 
specialized skill and knowledge, evaluating (a) the appropriateness of the probability of default, loss given default and exposure 
at default models used in the estimation of the Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL, and (b) the reasonableness of significant inputs and 
assumptions used in the estimation of the Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL related to (1) the design of future macroeconomic scenarios, 
(2) certain forecasted macroeconomic variables, (3) the probability-weights assigned to the scenarios, and (4) the assignment of 
borrower risk ratings for samples of loans. 

Goodwill Impairment Assessment of the Caribbean Banking Cash Generating Unit (CGU) 
As described in Notes 2 and 11 to the consolidated financial statements, the goodwill allocated to the Caribbean Banking CGU was 
$1,759 million. Management conducts a goodwill impairment test as of August 1 of each year by comparing the carrying amount of 
each CGU to its recoverable amount. The recoverable amount of a CGU is represented by its value in use (VIU), except in 
circumstances where the carrying amount of a CGU exceeds its VIU. In such cases, the greater of the CGU’s fair value less costs 
of disposal (FVLCD) and its VIU is the recoverable amount. Management estimated the recoverable amount of the Caribbean 
Banking CGU based on its FVLCD. Management calculated the FVLCD using a discounted cash flow method that projects future 
cash flows over a 5-year period based on management forecasts, adjusted to approximate the considerations of a prospective 
third-party buyer. Cash flows beyond the initial 5-year period are assumed by management to increase at a constant rate using a 
nominal long-term growth rate. The discount rate used to determine the present value of the Caribbean Banking CGU’s projected 
future cash flows is based on the bank-wide cost of capital, adjusted for the risks to which the CGU is exposed. As of August 1, 
2022, management determined that the recoverable amount was 109% of its carrying amount. Management also considered 
reasonably possible alternative scenarios, including market comparable transactions, which yielded valuations ranging from an 
immaterial deficit to an immaterial surplus. Management uses significant judgment to determine inputs to the discounted cash 
flow model. If the future cash flows and other assumptions in future periods deviate significantly from the current amounts used 
in management’s impairment testing, the value of goodwill could become impaired. 

The principal considerations for our determination that performing procedures relating to the goodwill impairment assessment 
of the Caribbean Banking CGU is a critical audit matter are (i) the significant judgment required by management when 
determining the recoverable amount of the CGU, including projecting future cash flows; (ii) a high degree of auditor judgment 
and subjectivity in performing procedures and evaluating audit evidence related to management’s calculation of the recoverable 
amount of the CGU; and (iii) the audit effort involved the use of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge. 

Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our overall 
opinion on the consolidated financial statements. These procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls relating to 
management’s goodwill impairment test, including controls over the determination of the recoverable amount of the Caribbean 
Banking CGU. These procedures also included, among others, testing management’s process for determining the recoverable 
amount of the CGU which consisted of (i) evaluating the appropriateness of the discounted cash flow model; (ii) testing the 
completeness and accuracy of certain underlying data used in the model; (iii) evaluating the reasonableness of certain 
assumptions used by management related to future cash flows, which involved evaluating the consistency with (a) current and 
past performance of the CGU, and (b) external market and industry data; and (iv) evaluating consistency of the recoverable 
amount with market comparable transactions. Professionals with specialized skill and knowledge were used to assist in 
evaluating the appropriateness of management’s discounted cash flow model and the consistency of the recoverable amount of 
the CGU with market comparable transactions. 

Uncertain Tax Positions 
As described in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, the Bank is subject to income tax laws in various jurisdictions 
where it operates and the complex tax laws are potentially subject to different interpretations by management and the relevant 
taxation authorities. As disclosed by management, significant judgment is required in the interpretation of the relevant tax laws, 
and in assessing the probability of acceptance of the Bank’s tax positions to determine tax provisions, which includes 

136

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

management’s best estimate of uncertain tax positions that are under audit or appeal by the relevant taxation authorities. 
Management performs a review on a quarterly basis to incorporate its best assessment based on information available, but 
additional liability and income tax expense could result based on the acceptance of the Bank’s tax positions by the relevant tax 
authorities. In some cases, as described in Note 22 to the consolidated financial statements, the Bank has received 
reassessments denying the tax deductibility of dividends from transactions including those with Tax Indifferent Investors. 

The principal considerations for our determination that performing procedures relating to uncertain tax positions is a critical 
audit matter are (i) the significant judgment required by management, including a high degree of estimation uncertainty, when 
(a) interpreting the relevant tax laws, and (b) assessing the probability of acceptance of the Bank’s tax positions, which includes 
management’s best estimate of uncertain tax positions that are under audit or appeal by relevant taxation authorities; (ii) a high 
degree of auditor judgment and subjectivity in performing procedures and evaluating the uncertain tax positions; and (iii) the 
audit effort involved the use of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge. 

Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our overall 
opinion on the consolidated financial statements. These procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls relating to the 
evaluation of uncertain tax positions and the impact on tax provisions. These procedures also included, among others, testing 
management’s process for (i) assessing the probability of acceptance of the Bank’s tax positions; and (ii) estimating provisions 
relating to uncertain tax positions, if applicable, which reflects management’s best estimate of uncertain tax positions that are 
under audit or appeal by relevant taxation authorities. This consisted of (i) evaluating the appropriateness of the methods used; 
(ii) testing the completeness and accuracy of underlying data used in the estimate; (iii) reviewing correspondence with relevant 
taxation authorities; (iv) making inquiries of the Bank’s internal and external legal counsel; and (v) evaluating, with the 
assistance of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge, the application of relevant tax laws, the reasonableness of 
management’s assessment of whether it is probable that the relevant tax authorities will accept the Bank’s tax positions, and 
evidence used by management. 

/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP 

Chartered Professional Accountants, Licensed Public Accountants 
Toronto, Canada 
November 29, 2022 

We have served as the Bank’s auditor since 2016. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

137 

Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowed  

317,845  

307,903  

Consolidated Balance Sheets  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Assets  
Cash and due from banks  

Interest-bearing deposits with banks  

Securities (Note 4)  

Trading  
Investment, net of applicable allowance  

Loans (Note 5)  

Retail  
Wholesale  

  

  

Other  

Allowance for loan losses (Note 5)  

Segregated fund net assets (Note 16)  

Customers’ liability under acceptances  
Derivatives (Note 9)  
Premises and equipment (Note 10)  
Goodwill (Note 11)  
Other intangibles (Note 11)  
Other assets (Note 13)  

Total assets  

Liabilities and equity  
Deposits (Note 14)  

Personal  
Business and government  
Bank  

  

  

  

  

  

Segregated fund net liabilities (Note 16)  

Other  

Acceptances  
Obligations related to securities sold short  
Obligations related to assets sold under repurchase agreements and securities loaned  
Derivatives (Note 9)  
Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities (Note 15)  
Other liabilities (Note 18)  

Subordinated debentures (Note 19)  

Total liabilities  

Equity attributable to shareholders  

Preferred shares and other equity instruments (Note 20)  
Common shares (Note 20)  
Retained earnings  
Other components of equity  

Non-controlling interests  

Total equity  

Total liabilities and equity  

The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements. 

David I. McKay  
President and Chief Executive Officer  

Frank Vettese    
  
Director  

$ 1,917,219   $ 1,706,323  

138

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

As at   

October 31  
2022  

  

$

72,397   $

108,011  

79,638  

October 31  
2021  

  
113,846  

  
139,240  
145,484  

284,724  

  
503,598  
218,066  

721,664  
(4,089)  

717,575  

2,666  

  
19,798  
95,541  
7,424  
10,854  
4,471  
61,883  

199,971  

  
  
362,488  
696,353  
41,990  

2,666  

  
19,873  
37,841  
262,201  
91,439  
12,816  
70,301  

494,471  

  
6,684  
17,655  
71,795  
2,533  

98,667  

95  

98,762  

  
148,205  
170,018  

318,223  

  
549,751  
273,967  

823,718  
(3,753)  

819,965  

2,638  

  
17,827  
154,439  
7,214  
12,277  
6,083  
80,300  

278,140  

2,638  

  
17,872  
35,511  
273,947  
153,491  
11,511  
95,235  

587,567  

  
7,318  
16,984  
78,037  
5,725  

108,064  

111  

108,175  

$ 1,917,219   $ 1,706,323  

  
  

$

404,932   $
759,870  
44,012  

1,208,814  

1,100,831  

10,025  

9,593  

1,809,044  

1,607,561  

Consolidated Statements of Income  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except per share amounts)  

Interest and dividend income (Note 3)  

Loans  
Securities  
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowed  
Deposits and other  

For the year ended  

October 31  
2022  

October 31  
2021  

$

$

  

  

  

  

  

  

Interest expense (Note 3)  
Deposits and other  
Other liabilities  
Subordinated debentures  

Net interest income  

Non-interest income  

Insurance premiums, investment and fee income (Note 15)  
Trading revenue  
Investment management and custodial fees  
Mutual fund revenue  
Securities brokerage commissions  
Service charges  
Underwriting and other advisory fees  
Foreign exchange revenue, other than trading  
Card service revenue  
Credit fees  
Net gains on investment securities  
Share of profit in joint ventures and associates (Note 12)  
Other  

Total revenue  

Provision for credit losses (Notes 4 and 5)  

Non-interest expense  

Human resources (Note 17 and 21)  
Equipment  
Occupancy  
Communications  
Professional fees  
Amortization of other intangibles (Note 11)  
Other  

Income before income taxes  
Income taxes (Note 22)  

Net income  

Net income attributable to:  

Shareholders  
Non-controlling interests  

Basic earnings per share (in dollars) (Note 23)  
Diluted earnings per share (in dollars) (Note 23)  
Dividends per common share (in dollars)  

Insurance policyholder benefits, claims and acquisition expense (Note 15)  

The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements. 

  
26,565  
7,062  
5,447  
1,697  

40,771  

  
10,751  
7,015  
288  

18,054  

22,717  

  
3,510  
926  
7,610  
4,289  
1,481  
1,976  
2,058  
1,038  
1,203  
1,512  
43  
110  
512  

26,268  

48,985  

484  

1,783  

  
16,528  
2,099  
1,554  
1,082  
1,511  
1,369  
2,466  

26,609  

20,109  
4,302  

15,807  

  
15,794  
13  

15,807  

11.08  
11.06  
4.96  

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

  
21,654  
4,877  
1,309  
305  

28,145  

  
5,448  
2,516  
179  

8,143  

20,002  

  
5,600  
1,183  
7,132  
4,251  
1,538  
1,858  
2,692  
1,066  
1,078  
1,530  
145  
130  
1,488  

29,691  

49,693  

(753)  

3,891  

  
16,539  
1,986  
1,584  
931  
1,351  
1,287  
2,246  

25,924  

20,631  
4,581  

16,050  

  
16,038  
12  

16,050  

11.08  
11.06  
4.32  

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

139 

Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income  

  

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Net income  

Other comprehensive income (loss), net of taxes (Note 22)  
Items that will be reclassified subsequently to income:  

Net change in unrealized gains (losses) on debt securities and loans at fair value through  

other comprehensive income  
Net unrealized gains (losses) on debt securities and loans at fair value through other  

comprehensive income  

Provision for credit losses recognized in income  
Reclassification of net losses (gains) on debt securities and loans at fair value through other  

comprehensive income to income  

Foreign currency translation adjustments  

Unrealized foreign currency translation gains (losses)  
Net foreign currency translation gains (losses) from hedging activities  
Reclassification of losses (gains) on foreign currency translation to income  
Reclassification of losses (gains) on net investment hedging activities to income  

Net change in cash flow hedges  

Net gains (losses) on derivatives designated as cash flow hedges  
Reclassification of losses (gains) on derivatives designated as cash flow hedges to income  

  
Items that will not be reclassified subsequently to income:  

Remeasurements of employee benefit plans  
Net fair value change due to credit risk on financial liabilities designated at fair value through  

Net gains (losses) on equity securities designated at fair value through other  

profit or loss  

comprehensive income  

  

Total other comprehensive income (loss), net of taxes  

Total comprehensive income (loss)  

Total comprehensive income attributable to:  

Shareholders  
Non-controlling interests  

The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements. 

For the year ended  

October 31  
2022  

October 31  
2021  

$

15,807  

$

16,050  

  
  

  

(2,241)  
(16)  

(12)  

(2,269)  

  
5,091  
(1,449)  
(18)  
17  

3,641  

  
1,634  
194  

1,828  

  
821  

1,747  

50  

2,618  

5,818  

21,625  

  
21,604  
21  

21,625  

$

$

$

$

$

$

  
  

  

177  
(9)  

(117)  

51  

  
(4,316)  
1,740  
(7)  
(1)  

(2,584)  

  
1,373  
272  

1,645  

  
2,251  

55  

38  

2,344  

1,456  

17,506  

  
17,501  
5  

17,506  

140

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

y
t
i
u
q
e
 
f
o
s
t
n
e
n
o
p
m
o
c
 
r
e
h
t
O

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

2
2
0
2
 
,
1
3
 
r
e
b
o
t
c
O
d
e
d
n
e
 
r
a
e
y
e
h
t
 
r
o
F

 

 
 

2
6
7
8
9

,

$

 
 

5
9

$

 
 

7
6
6
8
9

,

$

 
 

3
3
5
2

,

$

 
 

6
6
5

$

 
 

5
5
0
2

,

$

 
 
)
8
8
(

$

 
 

,

5
9
7
1
7
$

 
 
)
3
7
(

$

 
 
)
9
3
(

$

 
 

8
2
7
7
1

,

$

 
 

3
2
7
6

,

$

 
 

y
t
i
u
q
E

 
 
r
e
h
t
o
 
l
a
t
o
T

 
 

n
g
i
e
r
o
F

 
 
I
C
O
V
F

 
 

 

–
y
r
u
s
a
e
r
T

 
 

 

d
n
a
s
e
r
a
h
s

 
 

g
n
i
l
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
-
n
o
N

 
 

o
t
 
e
l
b
a
t
u
b
i
r
t
t
a

 
 

s
t
n
e
n
o
p
m
o
c

 
 

w
o
l
f
 
h
s
a
C

 
 

y
c
n
e
r
r
u
c

 
 

s
e
i
t
i
r
u
c
e
s

 
 

d
e
n
i
a
t
e
R

 
 

n
o
m
m
o
c

 
 

y
t
i
u
q
e
 
r
e
h
t
o

 
 

n
o
m
m
o
C

 
 

y
t
i
u
q
e
 
r
e
h
t
o

 
 

s
t
s
e
r
e
t
n
i

 
 

s
r
e
d
l
o
h
e
r
a
h
s

 
 

y
t
i
u
q
e
 
f
o

 
 

s
e
g
d
e
h

 
 

n
o
i
t
a
l
s
n
a
r
t
 
 

s
n
a
o
l
 

d
n
a

 
 

s
g
n
i
n
r
a
e

 
 

s
e
r
a
h
s

 
 

s
t
n
e
m
u
r
t
s
n
i

 
 

s
e
r
a
h
s

 
 

s
t
n
e
m
u
r
t
s
n
i

 
 
)
s
r
a

l
l

 

i

o
d
n
a
d
a
n
a
C
 
f
o
s
n
o

 

i
l
l
i

M

(

 
 

d
e
r
r
e
f
e
r
p

 
 

 

–
y
r
u
s
a
e
r
T

 
 

d
e
r
r
e
f
e
r
P

 
 

 

d
n
a
s
e
r
a
h
s

 
 

 

y
t
i
u
q
E
n
i
 
s
e
g
n
a
h
C
 
f
o
s
t
n
e
m
e
t
a
t
S
d
e
t
a
d

 

 

i
l
o
s
n
o
C

 
 
l
a
t
o
T

 
 

y
t
i
u
q
e

 
 

 
 

8
4
8

 
 
)
6
2
4
5
(

,

 
 
)
5
5
1
(

 
 

4
7
4
5

,

 
 
)
1
0
7
5
(

,

 
 

2

 
 
)
6
4
9
6
(

,

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 
)
6
5
(

 
 
)
2
5
2
(

 
 

8
1
8
5

,

 
 

7
0
8
5
1

,

 
 
)
5
(

 
 

–

 
 

8

 
 

3
1

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

5
4
3
2

,

 
 
)
5
7
4
1
(

,

 
 

3
6
7
4

,

 
 
)
3
4
7
4
(

,

 
 
)
6
(

 
 
)
8
5
1
6
(

,

 
 

3
2

 
 
)
0
6
2
(

 
 

6
5
4
1

,

 
 

0
5
0
6
1

,

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 
)
3
(

 
 
)
0
1
(

 
 
)
7
(

 
 

2
1

 
 

 
 

8
4
8

 
 
)
6
2
4
5
(

,

 
 
)
5
5
1
(

 
 

4
7
4
5

,

 
 
)
1
0
7
5
(

,

 
 

2

 
 
)
6
4
9
6
(

,

 
 
)
6
5
(

 
 
)
7
4
2
(

 
 

0
1
8
5

,

 
 

4
9
7
5
1

,

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

5
4
3
2

,

 
 
)
6
(

 
 
)
5
7
4
1
(

,

 
 

3
6
7
4

,

 
 
)
3
4
7
4
(

,

 
 
)
8
5
1
6
(

,

 
 

3
3

 
 
)
7
5
2
(

 
 

3
6
4
1

,

 
 

8
3
0
6
1

,

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

 
 
)
1
(

 
 
)
5
(

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

2

 
 
)
7
1
9
4
(

,

 
 
)
6
4
9
6
(

,

 
 
)
6
5
(

 
 
)
7
4
2
(

 
 

4
9
7
5
1

,

 
 

 
 
)
5
(

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 
)
6
(

 
 
)
8
5
1
6
(

,

 
 

3
3

 
 
)
7
5
2
(

 
 

4
4
3
2

,

 
 

8
3
0
6
1

,

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

–

 
 

5
7
1
8
0
1

,

$

 
 

1
1
1

$

 
 

4
6
0
8
0
1

,

$

 
 

5
2
7
5

,

$

 
 

4
9
3
2

,

$

 
 

8
8
6
5

,

$

 
 
)
7
5
3
2
(

,

$

 
 

,

7
3
0
8
7
$

 
 
)
4
3
3
(

$

 
 
)
5
(

$

 
 

8
1
3
7
1

,

$

 
 

3
2
3
7

,

$

 
 

 

d
o
i
r
e
p
 
f
o
d
n
e
 
t
a
e
c
n
a
l
a
B

 

 
 

2
9
1
3

,

 
 

8
2
8
1

,

 
 

3
3
6
3

,

 
 
)
9
6
2
2
(

,

 
 

8
1
6
2

,

 
 

s
e
x
a
t
 
f
o
 
t
e
n

 
,
)
s
s
o
l
(
 
e
m
o
c
n

i
 
e
v
i
s
n
e
h
e
r
p
m
o
c
 
r
e
h
t
o

 
l

a
t
o
T

 
 
1
2
0
2

 

 
,
1
3
 
r
e
b
o
t
c
O
d
e
d
n
e
 
r
a
e
y
e
h
t
 
r
o
F

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

y
t
i
u
q
e
 
f
o
s
t
n
e
n
o
p
m
o
c
 
r
e
h
t
O

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

y
t
i
u
q
E

 
 
r
e
h
t
o

 
l

a
t
o
T

 
 

n
g
i
e
r
o
F

 
 
I
C
O
V
F

 
 

 

–
y
r
u
s
a
e
r
T

 
 

 

d
n
a
s
e
r
a
h
s

 
 

g
n

i
l
l

o
r
t
n
o
c
-
n
o
N

 
 

o
t
 
e
l
b
a
t
u
b
i
r
t
t
a

 
 

s
t
n
e
n
o
p
m
o
c

 
 

w
o
l
f
 
h
s
a
C

 
 

y
c
n
e
r
r
u
c

 
 

s
e
i
t
i
r
u
c
e
s

 
 

i

d
e
n
a
t
e
R

 
 

n
o
m
m
o
c

 
 

y
t
i
u
q
e
 
r
e
h
t
o

 
 

n
o
m
m
o
C

 
 

y
t
i
u
q
e
 
r
e
h
t
o

 
 

d
e
r
r
e
f
e
r
p

 
 

 

–
y
r
u
s
a
e
r
T

 
 

d
e
r
r
e
f
e
r
P

 
 

 

d
n
a
s
e
r
a
h
s

 
 

7
6
7
6
8

,

$

 
 

3
0
1

$

 
 

4
6
6
6
8

,

$

 
 

4
1
4
3

,

$

 
 
)
9
7
0
1
(

,

$

 
 

2
3
6
4

,

$

 
 
)
9
3
1
(

$

 
 

6
0
8
9
5

,

$

 
 
)
9
2
1
(

$

 
 
)
3
(

$

 
 

8
2
6
7
1

,

$

 
 

8
4
9
5

,

$

 
 

y
t
i
u
q
e
 
l

a
t
o
T

 
 

s
t
s
e
r
e
t
n

i

 
 

l

s
r
e
d
o
h
e
r
a
h
s

 
 

y
t
i
u
q
e
 
f
o

 
 

s
e
g
d
e
h

 
 

n
o
i
t
a
l
s
n
a
r
t

 
 

s
n
a
o

l
 

d
n
a

 
 

i

s
g
n
n
r
a
e

 
 

s
e
r
a
h
s

 
 

s
t
n
e
m
u
r
t
s
n

i

 
 

s
e
r
a
h
s

 
 

s
t
n
e
m
u
r
t
s
n

i

 
 
)
s
r
a

l
l

 

i

o
d
n
a
d
a
n
a
C
 
f
o
s
n
o

 

i
l
l
i

M

(

 
 

2
2
9
4

,

 
 

2
5
5

 
 
)
3
8
1
5
(

,

 
 
)
8
1
5
(

 
 

 
 

9
9

 
 
)
9
0
5
(

 
 

0
5
7

 
 

s
t
n
e
m
u
r
t
s
n

i
 
y
t
i
u
q
e
 
r
e
h
t
o
d
n
a

 

 
l

 

a
t
i
p
a
c
e
r
a
h
s
 
f
o
s
e
u
s
s
I

 

 
 

n
o
i
t
a

l
l
e
c
n
a
c
 
r
o
f
 
d
e
s
a
h
c
r
u
p
s
e
r
a
h
s
n
o
m
m
o
C

 

 

 
 
)
0
5
1
(

 
 

s
t
n
e
m
u
r
t
s
n

 

 

i
 
y
t
i
u
q
e
 
r
e
h
t
o
d
n
a
s
e
r
a
h
s
d
e
r
r
e
f
e
r
p
 
f
o
n
o
i
t
p
m
e
d
e
R

 

 

 
 

s
t
n
e
m
u
r
t
s
n

 

 

i
 
y
t
i
u
q
e
 
r
e
h
t
o
d
n
a
s
e
r
a
h
s
y
r
u
s
a
e
r
t
 
f
o
s
e
s
a
h
c
r
u
P

 

 

 
 

s
t
n
e
m
u
r
t
s
n

 

 

i
 
y
t
i
u
q
e
 
r
e
h
t
o
d
n
a
s
e
r
a
h
s
y
r
u
s
a
e
r
t
 
f
o
s
e
l
a
S

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
r
e
h
t
o
n
o
s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
d
n
a
s
e
r
a
h
s
d
e
r
r
e
f
e
r
p
n
o
s
d
n
e
d
i
v
i
D

 

 

 

 
 

 

s
d
r
a
w
a
n
o
i
t
a
s
n
e
p
m
o
c
d
e
s
a
b
-
e
r
a
h
S

 

 
 

 

s
e
r
a
h
s
n
o
m
m
o
c
n
o
s
d
n
e
d
i
v
i
D

 

 

 
 

d
o

 

i
r
e
p
 
f
o
g
n
i
n
n
i
g
e
b
 
t
a
e
c
n
a
l
a
B

 

 
 

y
t
i
u
q
e
n

 

i
 
s
e
g
n
a
h
C

 
 

s
t
n
e
m
u
r
t
s
n

i
 
y
t
i
u
q
e

 
 

e
m
o
c
n

i
 
t
e
N

 
 
r
e
h
t
O

 
 

6
1
1
4

,

 
 

7
4
6

 
 
)
0
6
0
4
(

,

 
 
)
3
8
6
(

 
 

0
0
1

 
 

0
5
2
2

,

 
 

s
t
n
e
m
u
r
t
s
n

i
 
y
t
i
u
q
e
 
r
e
h
t
o
d
n
a

 

 
l

 

a
t
i
p
a
c
e
r
a
h
s
 
f
o
s
e
u
s
s
I

 

 
 
)
5
7
4
1
(

,

 
 

s
t
n
e
m
u
r
t
s
n

 

 

i
 
y
t
i
u
q
e
 
r
e
h
t
o
d
n
a
s
e
r
a
h
s
d
e
r
r
e
f
e
r
p
 
f
o
n
o
i
t
p
m
e
d
e
R

 

 

 
 

n
o
i
t
a

l
l
e
c
n
a
c
 
r
o
f
 
d
e
s
a
h
c
r
u
p
s
e
r
a
h
s
n
o
m
m
o
C

 

 

 
 

d
o

 

i
r
e
p
 
f
o
g
n
i
n
n
i
g
e
b
 
t
a
e
c
n
a
l
a
B

 

 
 

y
t
i
u
q
e
n

 

i
 
s
e
g
n
a
h
C

 
 

s
t
n
e
m
u
r
t
s
n

 

 

i
 
y
t
i
u
q
e
 
r
e
h
t
o
d
n
a
s
e
r
a
h
s
y
r
u
s
a
e
r
t
 
f
o
s
e
s
a
h
c
r
u
P

 

 

 
 

s
t
n
e
m
u
r
t
s
n

 

 

i
 
y
t
i
u
q
e
 
r
e
h
t
o
d
n
a
s
e
r
a
h
s
y
r
u
s
a
e
r
t
 
f
o
s
e
l
a
S

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
r
e
h
t
o
n
o
s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
d
n
a
s
e
r
a
h
s
d
e
r
r
e
f
e
r
p
n
o
s
d
n
e
d
i
v
i
D

 

 

 

 
 

 

s
d
r
a
w
a
n
o
i
t
a
s
n
e
p
m
o
c
d
e
s
a
b
-
e
r
a
h
S

 

 
 

 

s
e
r
a
h
s
n
o
m
m
o
c
n
o
s
d
n
e
d
i
v
i
D

 

 

 
 

s
t
n
e
m
u
r
t
s
n

i
 
y
t
i
u
q
e

 
 

e
m
o
c
n

i
 
t
e
N

 
 
r
e
h
t
O

 
 

2
6
7
8
9

,

$

 
 

5
9

$

 
 

7
6
6
8
9

,

$

 
 

3
3
5
2

,

$

 
 

6
6
5

$

 
 

5
5
0
2

,

$

 
 
)
8
8
(

$

 
 

5
9
7
1
7

,

$

 
 
)
3
7
(

$

 
 
)
9
3
(

$

 
 

8
2
7
7
1

,

$

 
 

3
2
7
6

,

$

 
 

 

d
o
i
r
e
p
 
f
o
d
n
e
 
t
a
e
c
n
a
l
a
B

 

 
 
)
1
8
8
(

 
 

5
4
6
1

,

 
 
)
7
7
5
2
(

,

 
 

1
5

 
 

s
e
x
a
t
 
f
o
 
t
e
n

 
,
)
s
s
o
l
(
 
e
m
o
c
n

i
 
e
v
i
s
n
e
h
e
r
p
m
o
c
 
r
e
h
t
o

 
l

a
t
o
T

 
.
s
t
n
e
m
e
t
a
t
S

 
l

a
i
c
n
a
n
i
F
d
e
t
a
d

 

i
l

 

o
s
n
o
C
e
s
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
t
r
a
p

 
l

a
r
g
e
t
n

i
 

 

 

 

n
a
e
r
a
s
e
t
o
n
g
n
i
y
n
a
p
m
o
c
c
a
e
h
T

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

141 

Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows  

  

For the year ended  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Cash flows from operating activities  

Net income  
Adjustments for non-cash items and others  

Provision for credit losses  
Depreciation  
Deferred income taxes  
Amortization and impairment of other intangibles  
Net changes in investments in joint ventures and associates  
Losses (Gains) on investment securities  
Losses (Gains) on disposition of business  

Adjustments for net changes in operating assets and liabilities  

Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities  
Net change in accrued interest receivable and payable  
Current income taxes  
Derivative assets  
Derivative liabilities  
Trading securities  
Loans, net of securitizations  
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowed  
Obligations related to assets sold under repurchase agreements and securities loaned  
Obligations related to securities sold short  
Deposits, net of securitizations  
Brokers and dealers receivable and payable  
Other  

Net cash from (used in) operating activities  

Cash flows from investing activities  

Change in interest-bearing deposits with banks  
Proceeds from sales and maturities of investment securities  
Purchases of investment securities  
Net acquisitions of premises and equipment and other intangibles  
Net proceeds from (cash transferred for) dispositions  
Cash used in acquisitions, net of cash acquired  

Net cash from (used in) investing activities  

Cash flows from financing activities  

Issuance of subordinated debentures  
Repayment of subordinated debentures  
Issue of common shares, net of issuance costs  
Common shares purchased for cancellation  
Issue of preferred shares and other equity instruments, net of issuance costs  
Redemption of preferred shares and other equity instruments  
Sales of treasury shares  
Purchases of treasury shares  
Dividends paid on shares and distributions paid on other equity instruments  
Dividends/distributions paid to non-controlling interests  
Change in short-term borrowings of subsidiaries  
Repayment of lease liabilities  

Net cash from (used in) financing activities  

Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and due from banks  

Net change in cash and due from banks  
Cash and due from banks at beginning of period (1)  

Cash and due from banks at end of period (1)  

Cash flows from operating activities include:  

Amount of interest paid  
Amount of interest received  
Amount of dividends received  
Amount of income taxes paid  

$2 billion; October 31, 2020 – $3 billion). 

$

$

October 31  
2022  

  
15,807  
  
484  
1,265  
569  
1,387  
(108)  
(43)  
(100)  
  
(1,305)  
333  
(3,336)  
(58,898)  
62,052  
(8,931)  
(102,653)  
(9,942)  
11,746  
(2,330)  
108,533  
4,612  
2,800  

21,942  

  
(28,373)  
99,143  
(122,964)  
(2,500)  
(313)  
(2,047)  

  
1,000  
(192)  
51  
(5,426)  
749  
(155)  
5,474  
(5,701)  
(6,960)  
(5)  
9,609  
(629)  

(2,185)  

(4,152)  

October 31  
2021  

  
16,050  
  
(753)  
1,276  
581  
1,316  
(127)  
(151)  
(26)  
  
601  
(509)  
1,738  
17,947  
(18,488)  
(3,164)  
(54,987)  
5,112  
(12,030)  
8,556  
88,876  
35  
9,191  

61,044  

  
(40,618)  
108,925  
(123,547)  
(2,186)  
78  
–  

  
2,750  
(2,500)  
90  
–  
2,245  
(1,475)  
4,763  
(4,743)  
(6,420)  
(3)  
(14)  
(621)  

(5,928)  

(2,810)  

(57,054)  

(57,348)  

$

$

(41,449)  
113,846  

72,397  

  
13,677  
35,817  
3,144  
7,326  

$

$

(5,042)  
118,888  

113,846  

  
7,555  
26,412  
2,575  
4,198  

(1)  We are required to maintain balances with central banks and other regulatory authorities. The total balances were $2 billion as at October 31, 2022 (October 31, 2021 – 

The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements. 

142

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Note 1 General information  

Royal Bank of Canada and its subsidiaries (the Bank) provide diversified financial services including Personal & Commercial 
Banking, Wealth Management, Insurance, Investor & Treasury Services and Capital Markets products and services on a global 
basis. Refer to Note 27 for further details on our business segments. 

The parent bank, Royal Bank of Canada, is a Schedule I Bank under the Bank Act (Canada) incorporated and domiciled in 
Canada. Our corporate headquarters are located at Royal Bank Plaza, 200 Bay Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada and our head 
office is located at 1 Place Ville-Marie, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Our common shares are listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange 
and New York Stock Exchange with the ticker symbol RY. 

These Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in compliance with International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS) as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB). Unless otherwise stated, monetary amounts are stated 
in Canadian dollars. Tabular information is stated in millions of dollars, except as noted. These Consolidated Financial 
Statements also comply with Subsection 308 of the Bank Act (Canada), which states that, except as otherwise specified by the 
Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions Canada (OSFI), our Consolidated Financial Statements are to be prepared in 
accordance with IFRS. The accounting policies outlined in Note 2 have been consistently applied to all periods presented. 

On November 29, 2022, the Board of Directors authorized the Consolidated Financial Statements for issue. 

Note 2 Summary of significant accounting policies, estimates and judgments  

The significant accounting policies used in the preparation of these Consolidated Financial Statements, including the accounting 
requirements prescribed by OSFI, are summarized below. These accounting policies conform, in all material respects, to IFRS. 
The same accounting policies have been applied to all periods presented. 

General 
Use of estimates and assumptions 
In preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements, management is required to make subjective estimates and assumptions that 
affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, net income and related disclosures. Estimates made by management are based 
on historical experience and other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable. Key sources of estimation uncertainty 
include: determination of fair value of financial instruments, allowance for credit losses, insurance claims and policy benefit 
liabilities, pensions and other post-employment benefits, income taxes, goodwill and other intangible assets, and provisions. 
Accordingly, actual results may differ from these and other estimates thereby impacting our future Consolidated Financial 
Statements. Refer to the relevant accounting policies in this Note for details on our use of estimates and assumptions. 

Significant judgments 
In preparation of these Consolidated Financial Statements, management is required to make significant judgments that affect 
the carrying amounts of certain assets and liabilities, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses recorded during the 
period. Significant judgments have been made in the following areas and discussed as noted in the Consolidated Financial 
Statements: 

Consolidation of structured entities  

Application of the effective interest method  

Note 2  

Fair value of financial instruments  

Derecognition of financial assets  

Allowance for credit losses  

Income taxes  

Employee benefits  

Provisions  

Goodwill and other intangibles  

Note 2  
Note 11  

  

Basis of consolidation 
Our Consolidated Financial Statements include the assets and liabilities and results of operations of the parent company, Royal 
Bank of Canada, and its subsidiaries including certain structured entities, after elimination of intercompany transactions, 
balances, revenues and expenses. 

Consolidation 
Subsidiaries are those entities, including structured entities, over which we have control. We control an entity when we are 
exposed, or have rights, to variable returns from our involvement with the entity and have the ability to affect those returns 
through our power over the investee. We have power over an entity when we have existing rights that give us the current ability 
to direct the activities that most significantly affect the entity’s returns (relevant activities). Power may be determined on the 
basis of voting rights or, in the case of structured entities, other contractual arrangements. 

We are not deemed to control an entity when we exercise power over an entity in an agency capacity. In determining 
whether we are acting as an agent, we consider the overall relationship between us, the investee and other parties to the 
arrangement with respect to the following factors: (i) the scope of our decision-making power; (ii) the rights held by other 
parties; (iii) the remuneration to which we are entitled; and (iv) our exposure to variability of returns. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

143 

Note 2  
Note 7  

Note 2  
Note 22  

Note 2  
Note 24  
Note 25  

  

Note 2  
Note 8  

Note 2  
Note 3  

Note 2  
Note 4  
Note 5  

Note 2  
Note 17  

Note 2 Summary of significant accounting policies, estimates and judgments (continued)  

The determination of control is based on the current facts and circumstances and is continuously assessed. In some 

circumstances, different factors and conditions may indicate that different parties control an entity depending on whether those 
factors and conditions are assessed in isolation or in totality. Significant judgment is applied in assessing the relevant factors 
and conditions in totality when determining whether we control an entity. Specifically, judgment is applied in assessing whether 
we have substantive decision-making rights over the relevant activities and whether we are exercising our power as a principal 
or an agent. 

We consolidate all subsidiaries from the date we obtain control and cease consolidation when an entity is no longer 

controlled by us. Our consolidation conclusions affect the classification and amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses 
reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Non-controlling interests in subsidiaries that we consolidate are shown on our Consolidated Balance Sheets as a separate 

component of equity which is distinct from equity attributable to our shareholders. The net income attributable to 
non-controlling interests is separately disclosed in our Consolidated Statements of Income. 

Investments in joint ventures and associates 
Our investments in associated corporations and limited partnerships over which we have significant influence are accounted for 
using the equity method. The equity method is also applied to our interests in joint ventures over which we have joint control. 
Under the equity method of accounting, investments are initially recorded at cost, and the carrying amount is increased or 
decreased to recognize our share of the investee’s net profit or loss, including our proportionate share of the investee’s Other 
comprehensive income (OCI), subsequent to the date of acquisition. 

Non-current assets held for sale and discontinued operations 
Non-current assets (and disposal groups) are classified as held for sale if their carrying amounts will be recovered principally 
through a sale transaction rather than through continuing use. This condition is satisfied when the asset is available for immediate 
sale in its present condition, management is committed to the sale, and it is highly probable to occur within one year. Non-current 
assets (and disposal groups) classified as held for sale are measured at the lower of their previous carrying amount and fair value 
less costs to sell and if significant, are presented separately from other assets on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 

A disposal group is classified as a discontinued operation if it meets the following conditions: (i) it is a component that can 

be distinguished operationally and financially from the rest of our operations and (ii) it represents either a separate major line of 
business or is part of a single coordinated plan to dispose of a separate major line of business or geographical area of 
operations. Disposal groups classified as discontinued operations are presented separately from our continuing operations in 
our Consolidated Statements of Income. 

Financial Instruments 

Classification of financial assets 
Financial assets are measured at initial recognition at fair value, and are classified and subsequently measured at fair value 
through profit or loss (FVTPL), fair value through other comprehensive income (FVOCI) or amortized cost based on our business 
model for managing the financial instruments and the contractual cash flow characteristics of the instrument. 

Debt instruments are measured at amortized cost if both of the following conditions are met and the asset is not designated 
as FVTPL: (a) the asset is held within a business model that is Held-to-Collect (HTC) as described below, and (b) the contractual 
terms of the instrument give rise to cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount 
outstanding (SPPI). 

Debt instruments are measured at FVOCI if both of the following conditions are met and the asset is not designated as 

FVTPL: (a) the asset is held within a business model that is Held-to-Collect-and-Sell (HTC&S) as described below, and (b) the 
contractual terms of the instrument give rise, on specified dates, to cash flows that are SPPI. 

All other debt instruments are measured at FVTPL. 
Equity instruments are measured at FVTPL, unless the asset is not held for trading purposes and we make an irrevocable 

election to designate the asset as FVOCI. This election is made on an instrument-by-instrument basis. 

Business model assessment 
We determine our business models at the level that best reflects how we manage portfolios of financial assets to achieve our 
business objectives. Judgment is used in determining our business models, which is supported by relevant, objective evidence 
including: 
(cid:129)

How the economic activities of our businesses generate benefits, for example through trading revenue, enhancing yields 
or hedging funding or other costs and how such economic activities are evaluated and reported to key management 
personnel; 
The significant risks affecting the performance of our businesses, for example, market risk, credit risk, or other risks as 
described in the Risk Management section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis, and the activities undertaken to 
manage those risks; 
Historical and future expectations of sales of the loans or securities portfolios managed as part of a business model; 
and 
The compensation structures for managers of our businesses, to the extent that these are directly linked to the 
economic performance of the business model. 

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

Our business models fall into three categories, which are indicative of the key strategies used to generate returns: 

(cid:129)

(cid:129)
(cid:129)

HTC: The objective of this business model is to hold loans and securities to collect contractual principal and interest 
cash flows. Sales are incidental to this objective and are expected to be insignificant or infrequent. 
HTC&S: Both collecting contractual cash flows and sales are integral to achieving the objective of the business model. 
Other fair value business models: These business models are neither HTC nor HTC&S, and primarily represent business 
models where assets are held-for-trading or managed on a fair value basis. 

144

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

SPPI assessment 
Instruments held within a HTC or HTC&S business model are assessed to evaluate if their contractual cash flows are comprised 
of solely payments of principal and interest. SPPI payments are those which would typically be expected from basic lending 
arrangements. Principal amounts include par repayments from lending and financing arrangements, and interest primarily 
relates to basic lending returns, including compensation for credit risk and the time value of money associated with the principal 
amount outstanding over a period of time. Interest can also include other basic lending risks and costs (for example, liquidity 
risk, servicing or administrative costs) associated with holding the financial asset for a period of time, and a profit margin. 

Where the contractual terms introduce exposure to risk or variability of cash flows that are inconsistent with a basic lending 

arrangement, the related financial asset is classified and measured at FVTPL. 

Securities 
Trading securities include all securities that are classified as FVTPL by nature and securities designated as FVTPL. Obligations to 
deliver trading securities sold but not yet purchased are recorded as liabilities and carried at fair value. Realized and unrealized 
gains and losses on these securities are generally recorded as Non-interest income – Trading revenue or Non-interest income – 
Other. Dividends and interest income accruing on Trading securities are recorded in Interest and dividend income. Interest and 
dividends accrued on securities sold short are recorded in Interest expense. 

Investment securities include all securities classified as FVOCI and amortized cost. All investment securities are initially 

recorded at fair value and subsequently measured according to the respective classification. 

Investment securities carried at amortized cost are measured using the effective interest method, and are presented net of 

any allowance for credit losses, calculated in accordance with our policy for Allowance for credit losses, as described below. 
Interest income, including the amortization of premiums and discounts on securities measured at amortized cost are recorded in 
Interest and dividend income. Impairment gains or losses recognized on amortized cost securities are recorded in Provision for 
credit losses (PCL). When a debt instrument measured at amortized cost is sold, the difference between the sale proceeds and 
the amortized cost of the security at the time of the sale is recorded as Net gains on Investment securities in Non-interest 
income. 

Debt securities carried at FVOCI are measured at fair value with unrealized gains and losses arising from changes in fair value 

included in Other components of equity. Impairment gains and losses are included in PCL and correspondingly reduce the 
accumulated changes in fair value included in Other components of equity. When a debt instrument measured at FVOCI is sold, the 
cumulative gain or loss is reclassified from Other components of equity to Net gains on Investment securities in Non-interest income. 
Equity securities carried at FVOCI are measured at fair value. Unrealized gains and losses arising from changes in fair value 

are recorded in Other components of equity and not subsequently reclassified to profit or loss when realized. Dividends from 
FVOCI equity securities are recognized in Interest and dividend income. 

We account for all of our securities using settlement date accounting and changes in fair value between the trade date and 

settlement date are reflected in income for securities measured at FVTPL, and changes in the fair value of securities measured at 
FVOCI between the trade and settlement dates are recorded in OCI except for changes in foreign exchange rates on debt 
securities, which are recorded in Non-interest income-Other. 

Fair value option 
A financial instrument with a reliably measurable fair value can be designated as FVTPL (the fair value option) on its initial recognition 
even if the financial instrument was not acquired or incurred principally for the purpose of selling or repurchasing. The fair value 
option can be used for financial assets if it eliminates or significantly reduces a measurement or recognition inconsistency that would 
otherwise arise from measuring assets or liabilities, or recognizing related gains and losses on a different basis (an accounting 
mismatch). The fair value option can be elected for financial liabilities if: (i) the election eliminates an accounting mismatch; (ii) the 
financial liability is part of a portfolio that is managed on a fair value basis, in accordance with a documented risk management or 
investment strategy; or (iii) there is an embedded derivative in the financial or non-financial host contract and the derivative is not 
closely related to the host contract. These instruments cannot be reclassified out of the FVTPL category while they are held or issued. 
Financial assets designated as FVTPL are recorded at fair value and any unrealized gain or loss arising due to changes in fair value is 

included in Trading revenue or Non-interest income – Other, depending on our business purpose for holding the financial asset. 

Financial liabilities designated as FVTPL are recorded at fair value and fair value changes attributable to changes in our own 

credit risk are recorded in OCI. Own credit risk amounts recognized in OCI will not be reclassified subsequently to net income. 
The remaining fair value changes not attributable to changes in our own credit risk are recorded in Trading revenue or 
Non-interest income – Other, depending on our business purpose for holding the financial liability. Upon initial recognition, if we 
determine that presenting the effects of own credit risk changes in OCI would create or enlarge an accounting mismatch in net 
income, the full fair value change in our debt designated as FVTPL is recognized in net income. To make that determination, we 
assess whether we expect that the effects of changes in the liability’s credit risk will be offset in profit or loss by a change in the 
fair value of another financial instrument measured at FVTPL. Such an expectation is based on an economic relationship between 
the characteristics of the liability and the characteristics of the other financial instrument. The determination is made at initial 
recognition and is not reassessed. To determine the fair value adjustments on our debt instruments designated as FVTPL, we 
calculate the present value of the instruments based on the contractual cash flows over the term of the arrangement by using 
our effective funding rate at the beginning and end of the period. 

Determination of fair value 
The fair value of a financial instrument is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an 
orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. We determine fair value by incorporating all factors 
that market participants would consider in setting a price, including commonly accepted valuation approaches. 

The Board of Directors provides oversight on valuation of financial instruments, primarily through the Audit Committee and 
Risk Committee. The Audit Committee reviews the presentation and disclosure of financial instruments that are measured at fair 
value, while the Risk Committee assesses the adequacy of governance structures and control processes for the valuation of 
these instruments. 

We have established policies, procedures and controls for valuation methodologies and techniques to ensure that fair value 

is reasonably estimated. Major valuation processes and controls include, but are not limited to, profit and loss decomposition, 
independent price verification (IPV) and model validation standards. These control processes are managed by either Finance or 
Group Risk Management and are independent of the relevant businesses and their trading functions. Profit and loss 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

145 

Note 2 Summary of significant accounting policies, estimates and judgments (continued)  

decomposition is a process to explain the fair value changes of certain positions and is performed daily for trading portfolios. All 
fair value instruments are subject to IPV, a process whereby trading function valuations are verified against external market 
prices and other relevant market data. Market data sources include traded prices, brokers and price vendors. We give priority to 
those third-party pricing services and prices having the highest and most consistent accuracy. The level of accuracy is 
determined over time by comparing third-party price values to traders’ or system values, to other pricing service values and, 
when available, to actual trade data. Quoted prices for identical instruments from pricing services or brokers are generally not 
adjusted unless there are issues such as stale prices. If multiple quotes for identical instruments are received, fair value is based 
on an average of the prices received or the quote from the most reliable vendor, after the outlier prices that fall outside of the 
pricing range are removed. Other valuation techniques are used when a price or quote is not available. Some valuation 
processes use models to determine fair value. We have a systematic and consistent approach to control the use of models. 
Valuation models are approved for use within our model risk management framework. The framework addresses, among other 
things, model development standards, validation processes and procedures and approval authorities. Model validation ensures 
that a model is suitable for its intended use and sets parameters for its use. All models are revalidated regularly by qualified 
personnel who are independent of the model design and development. Annually our model risk profile is reported to the Board of 
Directors. 

IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement permits an exception, through an accounting policy choice, to measure the fair value of a 

portfolio of financial instruments on a net open risk position basis when certain criteria are met. We have elected to use this 
policy choice to determine the fair value of certain portfolios of financial instruments, primarily derivatives, based on a net 
exposure to market or credit risk. 

We record valuation adjustments to appropriately reflect counterparty credit quality of our derivative portfolio, differences 

between the actual counterparty collateral discount curve and standard overnight index swap (OIS) discounting for 
collateralized derivatives, funding valuation adjustments (FVA) for uncollateralized and under-collateralized over-the-counter 
(OTC) derivatives, unrealized gains or losses at inception of the transaction, bid-offer spreads, unobservable parameters and 
model limitations. These adjustments may be subjective as they require significant judgment in the input selection, such as 
implied probability of default (PD) and recovery rate, and are intended to arrive at a fair value that is determined based on 
assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the financial instrument. The realized price for a transaction may be 
different from its recorded value, previously estimated using management judgment. Valuation adjustments may therefore 
impact unrealized gains and losses recognized in Non-interest income – Trading revenue or Other. 

Valuation adjustments are recorded for the credit risk of our derivative portfolios in order to arrive at their fair values. Credit 

valuation adjustments (CVA) take into account our counterparties’ creditworthiness, the current and potential future 
mark-to-market of transactions and the effects of credit mitigants such as master netting and collateral agreements. CVA 
amounts are derived from estimates of exposure at default (EAD), PD, recovery rates on a counterparty basis and market and 
credit factor correlations. EAD is the value of expected derivative related assets and liabilities at the time of default, estimated 
through modelling using underlying risk factors. PD is implied from the market prices for credit protection and the credit ratings 
of the counterparty. When market data is unavailable, it is estimated by incorporating assumptions and adjustments that market 
participants would use for determining fair value using these inputs. Correlation is the statistical measure of how credit and 
market factors may move in relation to one another. Correlation is estimated using historical data. CVA is calculated daily and 
changes are recorded in Non-interest income – Trading revenue. 

FVA are also calculated to incorporate the cost and benefit of funding in the valuation of uncollateralized and under-

collateralized OTC derivatives. Future expected cash flows of these derivatives are discounted to reflect the cost and benefit of 
funding the derivatives by using a funding curve, implied volatilities and correlations as inputs. 

Where required, a valuation adjustment is made to reflect the unrealized gain or loss at inception of a financial instrument 
contract where the fair value of that financial instrument is not obtained from a quoted market price or cannot be evidenced by 
other observable market transactions based on a valuation technique incorporating observable market data. 

A bid-offer valuation adjustment is required when a financial instrument is valued at the mid-market price, instead of the bid 

or offer price for asset or liability positions, respectively. The valuation adjustment takes into account the spread from the 
mid-market price to either the bid or offer price. 

Some valuation models require parameter calibration from such factors as market observable option prices. The calibration 

of parameters may be sensitive to factors such as the choice of instruments or optimization methodology. A valuation 
adjustment is also estimated to mitigate the uncertainties of parameter calibration and model limitations. 

In determining fair value, a hierarchy is used which prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques. The fair value hierarchy 

gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1) and the lowest 
priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3). Determination of fair value based on this hierarchy requires the use of observable market 
data whenever available. Level 1 inputs are unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that we 
have the ability to access at the measurement date. Level 2 inputs include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active 
markets, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active, and model inputs that are either 
observable, or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities. Level 3 
inputs are one or more inputs that are unobservable and significant to the fair value of the asset or liability. Unobservable inputs 
are used to measure fair value to the extent that observable inputs are not available at the measurement date. The availability of 
inputs for valuation may affect the selection of valuation techniques. The classification of a financial instrument in the hierarchy 
for disclosure purposes is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the measurement of fair value. 

Where observable prices or inputs are not available, management judgment is required to determine fair values by 

assessing other relevant sources of information such as historical data, proxy information from similar transactions, and through 
extrapolation and interpolation techniques. For more complex or illiquid instruments, significant judgment is required in the 
determination of the model used, the selection of model inputs, and in some cases the application of valuation adjustments to 
the model value or quoted price for inactively traded financial instruments, as the selection of model inputs may be subjective 
and the inputs may be unobservable. Unobservable inputs are inherently uncertain as there is little or no market data available 
from which to determine the level at which the transaction would occur under normal business circumstances. Appropriate 
parameter uncertainty and market risk valuation adjustments for such inputs and other model risk valuation adjustments are 
assessed in all such instances. 

146

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Loans 
Loans are debt instruments recognized initially at fair value and are subsequently measured in accordance with the 
Classification of financial assets policy provided above. The majority of our loans are carried at amortized cost using the 
effective interest method, which represents the gross carrying amount less allowance for credit losses. 

Interest on loans is recognized in Interest income using the effective interest method. The estimated future cash flows used in 
this calculation include those determined by the contractual term of the asset and all fees that are considered to be integral to the 
effective interest rate. Also included in this amount are transaction costs and all other premiums or discounts. Fees that relate to 
activities such as originating, restructuring or renegotiating loans are deferred and recognized as Interest income over the 
expected term of such loans using the effective interest method. Where there is a reasonable expectation that a loan will be 
originated, commitment and standby fees are also recognized as interest income over the expected term of the resulting loans 
using the effective interest method. Otherwise, such fees are recorded as other liabilities and amortized into Non-interest income 
over the commitment or standby period. Future prepayment fees on mortgage loans are not included as part of the effective 
interest rate at origination. If prepayment fees are received on a renewal of a mortgage loan before maturity, the fee is included as 
part of the effective interest rate, and if not renewed, the prepayment fee is recognized in interest income at the prepayment date. 

For loans carried at amortized cost or FVOCI, impairment losses are recognized at each balance sheet date in accordance 

with the three-stage impairment model outlined below. 

Allowance for credit losses 
An allowance for credit losses (ACL) is established for all financial assets, except for financial assets classified or designated as 
FVTPL and equity securities designated as FVOCI, which are not subject to impairment assessment. Assets subject to impairment 
assessment include loans, debt securities, interest-bearing deposits with banks, customers’ liability under acceptances, accounts 
and accrued interest receivable, and finance and operating lease receivables. ACL on loans measured at amortized cost is 
presented in Allowance for loan losses. ACL on debt securities measured at FVOCI is presented in Other components of equity. 
Other financial assets carried at amortized cost are presented net of ACL on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 

Off-balance sheet items subject to impairment assessment include financial guarantees and undrawn loan commitments. 

ACL on off-balance sheet items is separately calculated and included in Other Liabilities – Provisions. 

We measure the ACL on each balance sheet date according to a three-stage expected credit loss impairment model: 
(cid:129)

Stage 1 – From initial recognition of a financial asset to the date on which the asset has experienced a significant 
increase in credit risk relative to its initial recognition, a loss allowance is recognized equal to the credit losses 
expected to result from defaults occurring over the 12 months following the reporting date. 
Stage 2 – Following a significant increase in credit risk relative to the initial recognition of the financial asset, a loss 
allowance is recognized equal to the credit losses expected over the remaining lifetime of the asset. 

(cid:129)

Performing financial assets 
(cid:129)

(cid:129)

Impaired financial assets 
(cid:129)

Stage 3 – When a financial asset is considered to be credit-impaired, a loss allowance is recognized equal to credit 
losses expected over the remaining lifetime of the asset. Interest income is calculated based on the carrying 
amount of the asset, net of the loss allowance, rather than on its gross carrying amount. 

The ACL is a discounted probability-weighted estimate of the cash shortfalls expected to result from defaults over the relevant 
time horizon. For loan commitments, credit loss estimates consider the portion of the commitment that is expected to be drawn 
over the relevant time period. For financial guarantees, credit loss estimates are based on the expected payments required under 
the guarantee contract. For finance lease receivables, credit loss estimates are based on cash flows consistent with the cash 
flows used in measuring the lease receivable. 

Increases or decreases in the required ACL attributable to model changes and new originations, sales or maturities, and 
changes in risk, parameters and exposures due to changes in loss expectations or stage transfers are recorded in PCL. Write-offs 
and recoveries of amounts previously written off are recorded against ACL. 

The ACL represents an unbiased estimate of expected credit losses on our financial assets as at the balance sheet date. 
Judgment is required in making assumptions and estimations when calculating the ACL, including movements between the three 
stages and the application of forward-looking information. The underlying assumptions and estimates may result in changes to 
the provisions from period to period that significantly affect our results of operations. 

Measurement of expected credit losses 
Expected credit losses are based on a range of possible outcomes and consider all available reasonable and supportable 
information including internal and external ratings, historical credit loss experience, and expectations about future cash flows. 
The measurement of expected credit losses is based primarily on the product of the instrument’s PD, loss given default (LGD), 
and EAD discounted to the reporting date. The main difference between Stage 1 and Stage 2 expected credit losses for performing 
financial assets is the respective calculation horizon. Stage 1 estimates project PD, LGD and EAD over a maximum period of 
12 months while Stage 2 estimates project PD, LGD and EAD over the remaining lifetime of the instrument. 

An expected credit loss estimate is produced for each individual exposure. Relevant parameters are modelled on a collective 

basis using portfolio segmentation that allows for appropriate incorporation of forward-looking information. To reflect other 
characteristics that are not already considered through modelling, expert credit judgment is exercised in determining the final 
expected credit losses. 

For a small percentage of our portfolios which lack detailed historical information and/or loss experience, we apply 
simplified measurement approaches that may differ from what is described above. These approaches have been designed to 
maximize the available information that is reliable and supportable for each portfolio and may be collective in nature. 

Expected credit losses are discounted to the reporting period date using the effective interest rate. 

Expected life 
For instruments in Stage 2 or Stage 3, loss allowances reflect expected credit losses over the expected remaining lifetime of the 
instrument. For most instruments, the expected life is limited to the remaining contractual life. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

147 

Note 2 Summary of significant accounting policies, estimates and judgments (continued)  

An exemption is provided for certain instruments with the following characteristics: (a) the instrument includes both a loan 

and undrawn commitment component; (b) we have the contractual ability to demand repayment and cancel the undrawn 
commitment; and (c) our exposure to credit losses is not limited to the contractual notice period. For products in scope of this 
exemption, the expected life may exceed the remaining contractual life and is the period over which our exposure to credit losses 
is not mitigated by our normal credit risk management actions. This period varies by product and risk category and is estimated 
based on our historical experience with similar exposures and consideration of credit risk management actions taken as part of 
our regular credit review cycle. Products in scope of this exemption include credit cards, overdraft balances and certain revolving 
lines of credit. Judgment is required in determining the instruments in scope for this exemption and estimating the appropriate 
remaining life based on our historical experience and credit risk mitigation practices. 

Assessment of significant increase in credit risk 
The assessment of significant increase in credit risk requires significant judgment. Movements between Stage 1 and Stage 2 are 
based on whether an instrument’s credit risk as at the reporting date has increased significantly relative to the date it was 
initially recognized. For the purposes of this assessment, credit risk is based on an instrument’s lifetime PD, not the losses we 
expect to incur. The assessment is generally performed at the instrument level. 

Our assessment of significant increases in credit risk is performed at least quarterly based on three factors. If any of the 
following factors indicates that a significant increase in credit risk has occurred, the instrument is moved from Stage 1 to Stage 2: 
(1)  We have established thresholds for significant increases in credit risk based on both a percentage and absolute change 

in lifetime PD relative to initial recognition. For our wholesale portfolio, a decrease in the borrower’s risk rating is also 
required to determine that credit risk has increased significantly. 

(2)  Additional qualitative reviews are performed to assess the staging results and make adjustments, as necessary, to 

better reflect the positions whose credit risk has increased significantly. 

(3)  Instruments which are 30 days past due are generally considered to have experienced a significant increase in credit 

risk, even if our other metrics do not indicate that a significant increase in credit risk has occurred. 

The thresholds for movement between Stage 1 and Stage 2 are symmetrical. After a financial asset has transferred to Stage 2, if 
its credit risk is no longer considered to have significantly increased relative to its initial recognition, the financial asset will 
move back to Stage 1. 

For certain instruments with low credit risk as at the reporting date, it is presumed that credit risk has not increased 
significantly relative to initial recognition. Credit risk is considered to be low if the instrument has a low risk of default, and the 
borrower has the ability to fulfill their contractual obligations both in the near term and in the longer term, including periods of 
adverse changes in the economic or business environment. Certain interest-bearing deposits with banks, assets purchased under 
reverse repurchase agreements, insurance policy loans, and liquidity facilities extended to our multi-seller conduits have been 
identified as having low credit risk. 

Use of forward-looking information 
The measurement of expected credit losses for each stage and the assessment of significant increase in credit risk considers 
information about past events and current conditions as well as reasonable and supportable projections of future events and 
economic conditions. The estimation and application of forward-looking information requires significant judgment. 

The PD, LGD and EAD inputs used to estimate Stage 1 and Stage 2 credit loss allowances are modelled based on the 
macroeconomic variables (or changes in macroeconomic variables) that are most closely correlated with credit losses in the 
relevant portfolio. Each macroeconomic scenario used in our expected credit loss calculation includes a projection of all 
relevant macroeconomic variables used in our models for a five year period, subsequently reverting to long-run averages. 
Macroeconomic variables used in our expected credit loss models include, but are not limited to, unemployment rates, gross 
domestic product growth rates, equity return indices, commodity prices, and Canadian housing prices. Depending on their usage 
in the models, macroeconomic variables may be projected at a country, province/state or more granular level. 

Our estimation of expected credit losses in Stage 1 and Stage 2 is a discounted probability-weighted estimate that considers 

a minimum of three future macroeconomic scenarios. Our base case scenario is based on macroeconomic forecasts published 
by our internal economics group. Upside and downside scenarios vary relative to our base case scenario based on reasonably 
possible alternative macroeconomic conditions. Additional and more severe downside scenarios are designed to capture a 
broader range of potential credit losses in certain sectors. Scenario design, including the identification of additional downside 
scenarios, occurs at least on an annual basis and more frequently if conditions warrant. 

Scenarios are designed to capture a wide range of possible outcomes and weighted according to our best estimate of the 

relative likelihood of the range of outcomes that each scenario represents. Scenario weights take into account historical 
frequency, current trends, and forward-looking conditions and are updated on a quarterly basis. All scenarios considered are 
applied to all portfolios subject to expected credit losses with the same probabilities. 

Our assessment of significant increases in credit risk is based on changes in probability-weighted forward-looking lifetime 

PDs as at the reporting date, using the same macroeconomic scenarios as the calculation of expected credit losses. 

Definition of default 
The definition of default used in the measurement of expected credit losses is consistent with the definition of default used for 
our internal credit risk management purposes. Our definition of default may differ across products and consider both 
quantitative and qualitative factors, such as the terms of financial covenants and days past due. For retail and wholesale 
borrowers, except as detailed below, default occurs when the borrower is more than 90 days past due on any material obligation 
to us, and/or we consider the borrower unlikely to make their payments in full without recourse action on our part, such as taking 
formal possession of any collateral held. For certain credit card balances, default occurs when payments are 180 days past due. 
For these balances, the use of a period in excess of 90 days past due is reasonable and supported by observable data on write-off 
and recovery rates experienced on historical credit card portfolios. The definition of default used is applied consistently from 
period to period and to all financial instruments unless it can be demonstrated that circumstances have changed such that 
another definition of default is more appropriate. 

148

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Credit-impaired financial assets (Stage 3) 
Financial assets are assessed for credit-impairment at each balance sheet date and more frequently when circumstances 
warrant further assessment. Evidence of credit-impairment may include indications that the borrower is experiencing significant 
financial difficulty, probability of bankruptcy or other financial reorganization, as well as a measurable decrease in the estimated 
future cash flows evidenced by the adverse changes in the payments status of the borrower or economic conditions that 
correlate with defaults. An asset that is in Stage 3 will move back to Stage 2 when, as at the reporting date, it is no longer 
considered to be credit-impaired. The asset will transfer back to Stage 1 when its credit risk at the reporting date is no longer 
considered to have increased significantly from initial recognition, which could occur during the same reporting period as the 
transfer from Stage 3 to Stage 2. 

When a financial asset has been identified as credit-impaired, expected credit losses are measured as the difference 
between the asset’s gross carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows discounted at the instrument’s 
original effective interest rate. For impaired financial assets with drawn and undrawn components, expected credit losses also 
reflect any credit losses related to the portion of the loan commitment that is expected to be drawn down over the remaining life 
of the instrument. 

When a financial asset is credit-impaired, interest ceases to be recognized on the regular accrual basis, which accrues 
income based on the gross carrying amount of the asset. Rather, interest income is calculated by applying the original effective 
interest rate to the amortized cost of the asset, which is the gross carrying amount less the related ACL. 

ACL for credit-impaired loans in Stage 3 are established at the borrower level, where losses related to impaired loans are 
identified on individually significant loans, or collectively assessed and determined through the use of portfolio-based rates, 
without reference to particular loans. 

Individually assessed loans (Stage 3) 
When individually significant loans are identified as impaired, we reduce the carrying value of the loans to their estimated 
realizable value by recording an individually assessed ACL to cover identified credit losses. The individually assessed ACL 
reflects the expected amount of principal and interest calculated under the terms of the original loan agreement that will not be 
recovered, and the impact of time delays in collecting principal and/or interest (time value of money). The estimated realizable 
value for each individually significant loan is the present value of expected future cash flows discounted using the original 
effective interest rate for each loan. When the amounts and timing of future cash flows cannot be estimated with reasonable 
reliability, the estimated realizable amount may be determined using observable market prices for comparable loans, the fair 
value of collateral underlying the loans, and other reasonable and supported methods based on management judgment. 

Individually-assessed allowances are established in consideration of a range of possible outcomes, which may include 

macroeconomic or non-macroeconomic scenarios, to the extent relevant to the circumstances of the specific borrower being 
assessed. Assumptions used in estimating expected future cash flows reflect current and expected future economic conditions 
and are generally consistent with those used in Stage 1 and Stage 2 measurement. 

Significant judgment is required in assessing evidence of credit-impairment and estimation of the amount and timing of 
future cash flows when determining expected credit losses. Changes in the amount expected to be recovered would have a direct 
impact on PCL and may result in a change in the ACL. 

Collectively assessed loans (Stage 3) 
Loans that are collectively assessed are grouped on the basis of similar risk characteristics, taking into account loan type, 
industry, geographic location, collateral type, past due status and other relevant factors. 

The collectively-assessed ACL reflects: (i) the expected amount of principal and interest calculated under the terms of the 

original loan agreement that will not be recovered, and (ii) the impact of time delays in collecting principal and/or interest (time 
value of money). 

The expected principal and interest collection is estimated on a portfolio basis and references historical loss experience of 

comparable portfolios with similar credit risk characteristics, adjusted for the current environment and expected future 
conditions. A portfolio specific coverage ratio is applied against the impaired loan balance in determining the collectively-
assessed ACL. The time value of money component is calculated by using the discount factors applied to groups of loans sharing 
common characteristics. The discount factors represent the expected recovery pattern of the comparable group of loans, and 
reflect the historical experience of these groups adjusted for current and expected future economic conditions and/or industry 
factors. Significant judgment is required in assessing evidence of impairment and estimation of the amount and timing of future 
cash flows when determining expected credit losses. Changes in the amount expected to be recovered would have a direct 
impact on PCL and may result in a change in the ACL. 

Write-off of loans 
Loans and the related ACL are written off, either partially or in full, when there is no realistic prospect of recovery. Where loans 
are secured, they are generally written off after receipt of any proceeds from the realization of collateral. In circumstances where 
the net realizable value of any collateral has been determined and there is no reasonable expectation of further recovery, write 
off may be earlier. For credit cards, the balances and related ACL are generally written off when payment is 180 days past due. 
Personal loans are generally written off at 150 days past due. 

Modifications 
The original terms of a financial asset may be renegotiated or otherwise modified, resulting in changes to the contractual terms 
of the financial asset that affect the contractual cash flows. The treatment of such modifications is primarily based on the 
process undertaken to execute the renegotiation and the nature and extent of the expected changes. In the normal course of 
business, modifications which are performed for credit reasons, primarily related to troubled debt restructurings, are generally 
treated as modifications of the original financial asset. Modifications which are performed for other than credit reasons are 
generally considered to be an expiry of the original cash flows; accordingly, such renegotiations are treated as a derecognition of 
the original financial asset and recognition of a new financial asset. 

If a modification of terms does not result in derecognition of the financial asset, the carrying amount of the financial asset is 

recalculated as the present value of the renegotiated or modified contractual cash flows, discounted at the original effective 
interest rate and a gain or loss is recognized. The financial asset continues to be subject to the same assessments for significant 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

149 

Note 2 Summary of significant accounting policies, estimates and judgments (continued)  

increase in credit risk relative to initial recognition and credit-impairment, as described above. A modified financial asset will 
transfer out of Stage 3 if the conditions that led to it being identified as credit-impaired are no longer present and relate 
objectively to an event occurring after the original credit-impairment was recognized. A modified financial asset will transfer out 
of Stage 2 when it no longer satisfies the relative thresholds set to identify significant increases in credit risk, which are based on 
changes in its lifetime PD, days past due and other qualitative considerations. The financial asset continues to be monitored for 
significant increases in credit risk and credit-impairment. 

If a modification of terms results in derecognition of the original financial asset and recognition of the new financial asset, 

the new financial asset will generally be recorded in Stage 1, unless it is determined to be credit-impaired at the time of the 
renegotiation. For the purposes of assessing for significant increases in credit risk, the date of initial recognition for the new 
financial asset is the date of the modification. 

Derivatives 
When derivatives are embedded in other financial instruments or host contracts, such combinations are known as hybrid 
instruments. Some of the cash flows of a hybrid instrument vary in a way similar to a stand-alone derivative. If the host contract 
is a financial asset within the scope of IFRS 9 Financial Instruments (IFRS 9), the classification and measurement criteria are 
applied to the entire hybrid instrument as described in the Classification of financial assets section of Note 2. If the host contract 
is a financial liability or an asset that is not within the scope of IFRS 9, embedded derivatives are separately recognized if the 
economic characteristics and risks of the embedded derivative are not clearly and closely related to the host contract, unless an 
election has been made to elect the fair value option, as described above. The host contract is accounted for in accordance with 
the relevant standards. 

Derivatives are primarily used in trading activities. Derivatives are also used to manage our exposure to interest, currency, 

credit and other market risks. The most frequently used derivative products are interest rate and foreign exchange swaps, 
options, futures and forward rate agreements, equity swaps and credit derivatives. All derivative instruments are recorded on our 
Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. 

When derivatives are used in trading activities, the realized and unrealized gains and losses on these derivatives are 

recognized in Trading revenue in Non-interest income. Derivatives with positive fair values are reported as Derivative assets and 
derivatives with negative fair values are reported as Derivative liabilities. In accordance with our policy for offsetting financial 
assets and financial liabilities, the net fair value of certain derivative assets and liabilities are reported as an asset or liability, as 
appropriate. Valuation adjustments are included in the fair value of Derivative assets and Derivative liabilities. Premiums paid 
and premiums received are shown in Derivative assets and Derivative liabilities, respectively. 

When derivatives are used to manage our own exposures, we determine for each derivative whether hedge accounting can 

be applied, as discussed in the Hedge accounting section below. 

Derecognition of financial assets 
Financial assets are derecognized from our Consolidated Balance Sheets when our contractual rights to the cash flows from the 
assets have expired, when we retain the rights to receive the cash flows of the assets but assume an obligation to pay those cash 
flows to a third party subject to certain pass-through requirements or when we transfer our contractual rights to receive the cash 
flows and substantially all of the risk and rewards of the assets have been transferred. When we retain substantially all of the 
risks and rewards of the transferred assets, the transferred assets are not derecognized from our Consolidated Balance Sheets 
and are accounted for as secured financing transactions. When we neither retain nor transfer substantially all risks and rewards 
of ownership of the assets, we derecognize the assets if control over the assets is relinquished. If we retain control over the 
transferred assets, we continue to recognize the transferred assets to the extent of our continuing involvement. 

Management judgment is applied in determining whether the contractual rights to the cash flows from the transferred assets 

have expired or whether we retain the rights to receive cash flows on the assets but assume an obligation to pay for those cash 
flows. We derecognize transferred financial assets if we transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of the ownership in the 
assets. When assessing whether we have transferred substantially all of the risk and rewards of the transferred assets, 
management considers the Bank’s exposure before and after the transfer with the variability in the amount and timing of the net 
cash flows of the transferred assets. In transfers in which we retain the servicing rights, management has applied judgment in 
assessing the benefits of servicing against market expectations. When the benefits of servicing are greater than fair value, a 
servicing asset is recognized in Other assets in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. When the benefits of servicing are less than fair 
value, a servicing liability is recognized in Other liabilities in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 

Derecognition of financial liabilities 
We derecognize a financial liability from our Consolidated Balance Sheets when our obligation specified in the contract expires, 
or is discharged or cancelled. We recognize the difference between the carrying amount of a financial liability transferred and the 
consideration paid in our Consolidated Statements of Income. 

Interest 
Interest is recognized in Interest income and Interest expense in the Consolidated Statements of Income for all interest-bearing 
financial instruments. The effective interest rate is the rate that discounts estimated future cash flows over the expected life of 
the financial asset or liability to the net carrying amount upon initial recognition. Significant judgment is applied in determining 
the effective interest rate due to uncertainty in the timing and amounts of future cash flows. 

Dividend income 
Dividend income is recognized when the right to receive payment is established. This is the ex-dividend date for listed equity 
securities, and usually the date when shareholders have approved the dividend for unlisted equity securities. 

Transaction costs 
Transaction costs are expensed as incurred for financial instruments classified or designated as FVTPL. For other financial 
instruments, transaction costs are capitalized on initial recognition. For financial assets and financial liabilities measured at 

150

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

amortized cost, capitalized transaction costs are amortized through net income over the estimated life of the instrument using 
the effective interest method. For financial assets measured at FVOCI that do not have fixed or determinable payments and no 
fixed maturity, capitalized transaction costs are recognized in net income when the asset is derecognized or becomes impaired. 

Offsetting financial assets and financial liabilities 
Financial assets and financial liabilities are offset on the Consolidated Balance Sheets when there exists both a legally 
enforceable right to offset the recognized amounts and an intention to settle on a net basis, or realize the asset and settle the 
liability simultaneously. 

Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and sold under repurchase agreements 
We purchase securities under agreements to resell (reverse repurchase agreements) and take possession of these securities. We 
monitor the market value of the securities purchased and additional collateral is obtained when appropriate. We have the right 
to liquidate the collateral held in the event of counterparty default. Reverse repurchase agreements are treated as collateralized 
lending transactions. We also sell securities under agreements to repurchase (repurchase agreements), which are treated as 
collateralized borrowing transactions. The securities received under reverse repurchase agreements and securities delivered 
under repurchase agreements are not recognized on, or derecognized from, our Consolidated Balance Sheets, respectively, 
unless the risks and rewards of ownership are obtained or relinquished. 

Reverse repurchase agreements and repurchase agreements are carried on our Consolidated Balance Sheets at the 
amounts at which the securities were initially acquired or sold, except when they are classified or designated as FVTPL and are 
recorded at fair value. Interest earned on reverse repurchase agreements is included in Interest income, and interest incurred on 
repurchase agreements is included in Interest expense in our Consolidated Statements of Income. Changes in fair value for 
reverse repurchase agreements and repurchase agreements classified or designated as FVTPL are included in Trading revenue or 
Other in Non-interest income. 

Hedge accounting 
We have elected to continue to apply the hedge accounting principles under IAS 39 instead of those under IFRS 9.  

We use derivatives and non-derivatives in our hedging strategies to manage our exposure to interest rate, currency, credit 
and other market risks. Where hedge accounting can be applied, a hedge relationship is designated and documented at inception 
to detail the particular risk management objective and strategy for undertaking the hedge transaction. The documentation 
identifies the specific asset, liability or anticipated cash flows being hedged, the risk that is being hedged, the type of hedging 
instrument used and how effectiveness will be assessed. We assess, both at the inception of the hedge and on an ongoing basis, 
whether the hedging instruments are ‘highly effective’ in offsetting changes in the fair value or cash flows of the hedged items. A 
hedge is regarded as highly effective only if the following criteria are met: (i) at inception of the hedge and throughout its life, the 
hedge is expected to be highly effective in achieving offsetting changes in fair value or cash flows attributable to the hedged risk, 
and (ii) actual results of the hedge are within a pre-determined range. We perform effectiveness testing to demonstrate that the 
relationship has been and is expected to be effective over the remaining term of the hedge. In the case of hedging a forecast 
transaction, the transaction must have a high probability of occurring and must present an exposure to variations in cash flows 
that could ultimately affect the reported net profit or loss. Hedge accounting is discontinued when it is determined that the 
hedging instrument is no longer effective as a hedge, the hedging instrument or hedged item is terminated or sold, or the forecast 
transaction is no longer deemed highly probable. Refer to Note 9 for the fair value of derivatives and non-derivative instruments 
categorized by their hedging relationships, as well as derivatives that are not designated in hedging relationships. 

Until the hedging relationships impacted by the Interest rate benchmark reform (the Reform) fully transition to alternative 
benchmark rates (ABRs), our prospective effectiveness testing is based on existing hedged cash flows or hedged risks and any 
ineffectiveness arising from retrospective testing does not result in a discontinuation of the hedge. Additionally, effectiveness 
testing is applied separately to hedged items referencing ABRs and hedged items referencing interbank offered rates (IBORs), 
which include USD London Interbank Offered Rate (USD LIBOR) and Canadian Dollar Offered Rate (CDOR), in accordance with 
the Phase 2 amendments to IFRS 9 Financial Instruments, IAS 39 Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement, IFRS 7 
Financial Instruments: Disclosures, IFRS 4 Insurance contracts, and IFRS 16 Leases (the Amendments). Subsequently, when these 
relationships fully transition to ABRs, and provided qualifying criteria are met, we will amend the related hedge documentation 
for the ABR risk, including consequential changes to the description of the hedging instrument(s), the hedged item(s), and the 
method for assessing hedge effectiveness, without discontinuing the existing hedging relationships. 

Fair value hedges 
In a fair value hedging relationship, the carrying value of the hedged item is adjusted for changes in fair value attributable to the 
hedged risk and recognized in Non-interest income. Changes in fair value of the hedged item, to the extent that the hedging 
relationship is effective, are offset by changes in the fair value of the hedging derivative, which are also recognized in 
Non-interest income. When hedge accounting is discontinued, the carrying value of the hedged item is no longer adjusted and the 
cumulative fair value adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged items are amortized to Net income over the expected 
remaining life of the hedged items. 

We predominantly use interest rate swaps to hedge our exposure to changes in a fixed interest rate instrument’s fair value 

caused by changes in interest rates. Until the hedging relationships impacted by the Reform fully transition to ABRs, we apply 
hedge accounting to IBOR rates which may not be contractually specified when that rate is separately identifiable and reliably 
measurable at inception of the hedge relationship. 

Cash flow hedges 
In a cash flow hedging relationship, the effective portion of the change in the fair value of the hedging derivative, net of taxes, is 
recognized in OCI and reclassified to profit or loss as the associated hedged forecast transaction occurs, while the ineffective 
portion is recognized in Non-interest income. When hedge accounting is discontinued, the cumulative amounts previously 
recognized in OCI are reclassified to Net interest income during the periods when the variability in the cash flows of the hedged 
item affects Net interest income. Unrealized gains and losses on derivatives are reclassified immediately to Net income when the 
hedged item is sold or terminated early, or when the forecast transaction is no longer expected to occur. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

151 

Note 2 Summary of significant accounting policies, estimates and judgments (continued)  

We predominantly use interest rate swaps to hedge the variability in cash flows related to a variable-rate asset or liability. 
Until the hedging relationships impacted by the Reform fully transition to ABRs, we treat the highly probable hedged IBORs based 
cash flows of groups of similar assets or liabilities with similar risk characteristics as unchanged as a result of the Reform. In 
addition, associated cash flow hedge reserves are not recycled into net income solely due to changes related to the transition 
from IBORs to ABRs. Subsequently, when some items in the group transition to ABRs before other items, the individual hedged 
items are allocated to subgroups based on the benchmark interest rate being hedged. We test hedge effectiveness based on the 
defined subgroups, in accordance with the Amendments, if eligibility requirements are met. If a subgroup fails the eligibility 
requirements, we would discontinue hedge accounting prospectively for the hedging relationship in its entirety. 

Net investment hedges 
In hedging our foreign currency exposure to a net investment in a foreign operation, the effective portion of foreign exchange 
gains and losses on the hedging instruments, net of applicable taxes, is recognized in OCI and the ineffective portion is 
recognized in Non-interest income. The amounts, or a portion thereof, previously recognized in Other components of equity are 
recognized in Net income on the disposal, or partial disposal, of the foreign operation. 

We use foreign exchange contracts and foreign currency-denominated liabilities to manage our foreign currency exposures 

to net investments in foreign operations having a functional currency other than the Canadian dollar. 

Guarantees 
Financial guarantee contracts are contracts that contingently require us to make specified payments (in cash, other assets, our 
own shares or provision of services) to reimburse the holder for a loss it incurs because a specified debtor fails to make payment 
when due in accordance with the original or modified terms of a debt instrument. Liabilities are recognized on our Consolidated 
Balance Sheets at the inception of a guarantee for the fair value of the obligation undertaken in issuing the guarantee. Financial 
guarantees are subsequently remeasured at the higher of (i) the amount of expected credit losses and (ii) the amount initially 
recognized less, when appropriate, the cumulative amount of income recognized. 

If the financial guarantee contract meets the definition of a derivative, it is measured at fair value at each balance sheet 

date and reported under Derivatives on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 

Insurance and segregated funds 
Premiums from long-duration contracts, primarily life, health and annuity insurance (life insurance), are recognized when due in 
Non-interest income – Insurance premiums, investment and fee income. Premiums from short-duration contracts, primarily 
property and casualty, and fees for administrative services are recognized in Insurance premiums, investment and fee income 
over the related contract period. Unearned premiums of the short-duration contracts, representing the unexpired portion of 
premiums, are reported in Other liabilities. Investments made by our insurance operations are classified as FVOCI instruments 
and amortized cost instruments, except for investments supporting the policy benefit liabilities on life insurance contracts and a 
portion of property and casualty contracts. These are designated as FVTPL with changes in fair value reported in Insurance 
premiums, investment and fee income. 

Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities represent current claims and estimates for future insurance policy benefits. 

Liabilities for life insurance contracts are determined using the Canadian Asset Liability Method (CALM), which incorporates 
assumptions for mortality, morbidity, policy lapses and surrenders, investment yields, policy dividends, operating and policy 
maintenance expenses and provisions for adverse deviation. These assumptions are reviewed at least annually and updated in 
response to actual experience and market conditions. Liabilities for property and casualty insurance represent estimated 
provisions for reported and unreported claims. Liabilities for life and property and casualty insurance are included in Insurance 
claims and policy benefit liabilities. Changes in Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities are included in the Insurance 
policyholder benefits, claims and acquisition expense in our Consolidated Statements of Income in the period in which the 
estimates change. 

Premiums ceded for reinsurance and reinsurance recoveries on policyholder benefits and claims incurred are reported in 

income and expense as appropriate. Reinsurance recoverables, which relate to paid benefits and unpaid claims, are included in 
Other assets. 

Acquisition costs for new insurance contracts consist of commissions, premium taxes, certain underwriting costs and other 

costs that vary with the acquisition of new contracts. Deferred acquisition costs for life insurance products are implicitly 
recognized in Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities by CALM. For property and casualty insurance, these costs are 
classified as Other assets and amortized over the policy term. 

Segregated funds are lines of business in which we issue an insurance contract where the benefit amount is directly linked to 

the market value of the investments held in the underlying fund. The contractual arrangement is such that the underlying 
segregated fund assets are registered in our name but the segregated fund policyholders bear the risks and rewards of the funds’ 
investment performance. Liabilities for these contracts are calculated based on contractual obligations using actuarial 
assumptions and are at least equivalent to the surrender or transfer value calculated by reference to the value of the relevant 
underlying funds or indices. Segregated funds’ assets and liabilities are separately presented on our Consolidated Balance 
Sheets. As the segregated fund policyholders bear the risks and rewards of the funds’ performance, investment income earned by 
the segregated funds and expenses incurred by the segregated funds are offset and are not separately presented in our 
Consolidated Statements of Income. Fee income we earn from segregated funds includes management fees, mortality, policy 
administration and surrender charges, and these fees are recorded in Non-interest income – Insurance premiums, investment 
and fee income. We provide minimum death benefit and maturity value guarantees on segregated funds. The liability associated 
with these minimum guarantees is recorded in Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities. 

Liability adequacy tests are performed for all insurance contract portfolios at each balance sheet date to ensure the 

adequacy of insurance contract liabilities. Current best estimates of future contractual cash flows, claims handling and 
administration costs, and investment returns from the assets backing the liabilities are taken into account in the tests. When the 
test results indicate that there is a deficiency in liabilities, the deficiency is charged immediately to our Consolidated Statements 
of Income by writing down the deferred acquisition costs in Other assets and/or increasing Insurance claims and policy benefit 
liabilities. 

152

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Employee benefits – Pensions and other post-employment benefits 
Our defined benefit pension expense, which is included in Non-interest expense – Human resources, consists of the cost of 
employee pension benefits for the current year’s service, net interest on the net defined benefit liability (asset), past service cost 
and gains or losses on settlement. Remeasurements of the net defined benefit obligation, which comprise actuarial gains and 
losses and return on plan assets (excluding amounts included in net interest on the net defined benefit liability), are recognized 
immediately in OCI in the period in which they occur. Actuarial gains and losses comprise experience adjustments (the effects of 
differences between the previous actuarial assumptions and what has actually occurred), as well as the effects of changes in 
actuarial assumptions. Amounts recognized in OCI will not be reclassified subsequently to net income. Past service cost is the 
change in the present value of the defined benefit obligation resulting from a plan amendment or curtailment and is charged 
immediately to income. 

For each defined benefit pension plan, we recognize the present value of our defined benefit obligations less the fair value of 

the plan assets as a defined benefit liability reported in Other liabilities – Employee benefit liabilities on our Consolidated 
Balance Sheets. For plans where there is a net defined benefit asset, the amount is reported as an asset in Other assets – 
Employee benefit assets on our Consolidated Balance sheets. 

The calculation of defined benefit expenses and obligations requires significant judgment as the recognition is dependent on 
discount rates and various actuarial assumptions such as healthcare cost trend rates, projected salary increases, retirement age 
and mortality and termination rates. Due to the long-term nature of these plans, such estimates and assumptions are subject to 
inherent risks and uncertainties. For our pension and other post-employment benefit plans, the discount rate is determined by 
reference to market yields on high quality corporate bonds. Since the discount rate is based on currently available yields, and 
involves management’s assessment of market liquidity, it is only a proxy for future yields. Actuarial assumptions, set in 
accordance with current practices in the respective countries of our plans, may differ from actual experience as country specific 
statistics are only estimates of future employee behaviour. These assumptions are determined by management and are reviewed 
by actuaries at least annually. Changes to any of the above assumptions may affect the amounts of benefits obligations, 
expenses and remeasurements that we recognize. 

Our contributions to defined contribution pension plans are expensed when employees have rendered services in exchange 

for such contributions. Defined contribution pension expense is included in Non-interest expense – Human resources. 

Share-based compensation 
We offer share-based compensation plans to certain key employees and to our non-employee directors. 

To account for stock options granted to employees, compensation expense is recognized over the applicable vesting period 
with a corresponding increase in equity. Fair value is determined by using option valuation models, which take into account the 
exercise price of the option, the current share price, the risk free interest rate, the expected volatility of the share price over the 
life of the option and other relevant factors. When the options are exercised, the exercise price proceeds together with the 
amount initially recorded in equity are credited to common shares. Our other share-based compensation plans include 
performance deferred share plans and deferred share unit plans for key employees (the Plans). The obligations for the Plans are 
accrued over their vesting periods. The Plans are settled in cash. 

For cash-settled awards, our accrued obligations are adjusted to their fair value at each balance sheet date. For share-
settled awards, our expected obligations recognized in equity are based on the fair value of our common shares at the date of 
grant. Changes in our obligations, net of related hedges, are recorded as Non-interest expense – Human resources in our 
Consolidated Statements of Income with a corresponding increase in Other liabilities for cash-settled awards and in Retained 
earnings for share-settled awards. Compensation expense is recognized in the year the awards are earned by plan participants 
based on the vesting schedule of the relevant plans, net of estimated forfeitures. 

The compensation cost attributable to options and awards granted to employees who are eligible to retire or will become 
eligible to retire during the vesting period, is recognized immediately if the employee is eligible to retire on the grant date or over 
the period between the grant date and the date the employee becomes eligible to retire. 

Our contributions to the employee savings and share ownership plans are expensed as incurred. 

Income taxes 
Income tax comprises current tax and deferred tax and is recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Income except to the 
extent that it relates to items recognized directly in equity, in which case it is recognized in equity. 

Current income tax payable on profits is recognized as an expense based on the applicable tax laws in each jurisdiction in 
the period in which profits arise, calculated using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date. Deferred 
tax is recognized on temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for accounting and tax 
purposes. A deferred income tax asset or liability is determined for each temporary difference, except for earnings related to our 
subsidiaries, branches, associates and interests in joint ventures where the temporary differences will not reverse in the 
foreseeable future and we have the ability to control the timing of reversal. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined 
based on the tax rates that are expected to be in effect in the period that the asset is realized or the liability is settled, based on 
tax rates and tax laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date. Current tax assets and 
liabilities are offset when they are levied by the same taxation authority on either the same taxable entity or different taxable 
entities within the same tax reporting group (which intends to settle on a net basis), and when there is a legal right to offset. 
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when the same conditions are satisfied. Our Consolidated Statements of Income 
include items that are non-taxable or non-deductible for income tax purposes and, accordingly, this causes the income tax 
provision to be different from what it would be if based on statutory rates. 

Deferred income taxes accumulated as a result of temporary differences and tax loss carryforwards are included in Other 
assets and Other liabilities. On a quarterly basis, we review our deferred income tax assets to determine whether it is probable 
that the benefits associated with these assets will be realized; this review involves evaluating both positive and negative 
evidence. 

We are subject to income tax laws in various jurisdictions where we operate, and the complex tax laws are potentially 

subject to different interpretations by us and the relevant taxation authorities. Significant judgment is required in the 
interpretation of the relevant tax laws and in assessing the probability of acceptance of our tax positions to determine our tax 
provision, which includes our best estimate of uncertain tax positions that are under audit or appeal by the relevant tax 
authorities. We perform a review on a quarterly basis to incorporate our best assessment based on information available, but 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

153 

Note 2 Summary of significant accounting policies, estimates and judgments (continued)  

additional liability and income tax expense could result based on the acceptance of our tax positions by the relevant tax 
authorities. 

The determination of our deferred tax asset or liability also requires significant management judgment as the recognition is 

dependent on our projection of future taxable profits and tax rates that are expected to be in effect in the period the asset is 
realized or the liability is settled. Any changes in our projection will result in changes in deferred tax assets or liabilities on our 
Consolidated Balance Sheets, and also deferred tax expense on our Consolidated Statements of Income. 

Business combinations, goodwill and other intangibles 
All business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method. Non-controlling interests, if any, are recognized at 
their proportionate share of the fair value of identifiable assets and liabilities, unless otherwise indicated. Identifiable intangible 
assets are recognized separately from goodwill and included in Other intangibles. Goodwill represents the excess of the price 
paid for the business acquired over the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired on the date of acquisition. 

Goodwill 
Goodwill is allocated to cash-generating units or groups of cash-generating units for the purpose of impairment testing, which is 
undertaken at the lowest level at which goodwill is monitored for internal management purposes. Impairment testing is 
performed annually as at August 1, or more frequently if there are objective indicators of impairment, by comparing the 
recoverable amount of a cash-generating unit (CGU) with its carrying amount. The recoverable amount of a CGU is the higher of 
its value in use (VIU) and its fair value less costs of disposal (FVLCD). VIU is the present value of the expected future cash flows 
from a CGU. FVLCD is the amount obtainable from the sale of a CGU in an orderly transaction between market participants, less 
disposal costs. The fair value of a CGU is estimated using valuation techniques such as a discounted cash flow method, adjusted 
to reflect the considerations of a prospective third-party buyer. External evidence such as binding sale agreements or recent 
transactions for similar businesses within the same industry is considered to the extent that it is available. 

Significant judgment is involved in estimating the model inputs used to determine the recoverable amount of our CGUs, in 
particular future cash flows, discount rates and terminal growth rates, due to the uncertainty in the timing and amount of cash 
flows and the forward-looking nature of these inputs. Future cash flows are based on financial plans agreed by management 
which are estimated based on forecast results, business initiatives, planned capital investments and returns to shareholders. 
Discount rates are based on the bank-wide cost of capital, adjusted for CGU-specific risks and currency exposure as reflected by 
differences in expected inflation. Bank-wide cost of capital is based on the Capital Asset Pricing Model, the Dividend Growth 
Model and peer analysis. CGU-specific risks include country risk, business/operational risk, geographic risk (including political 
risk, devaluation risk, and government regulation), currency risk, and price risk (including product pricing risk and inflation). 
Terminal growth rates are based on the long-term steady state growth expectations in the countries within which the CGU 
operates. If the future cash flows and other assumptions in future periods deviate significantly from the current amounts used in 
our impairment testing, the value of our goodwill could become impaired, with any such impairment loss recognized in 
Non-interest expense. 

The carrying amount of a CGU includes the carrying amount of assets, liabilities and goodwill allocated to the CGU. If the 
recoverable amount is less than the carrying value, the impairment loss is allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of any 
goodwill allocated to the CGU and then to the other non-financial assets of the CGU proportionately based on the carrying 
amount of each asset. Any impairment loss is charged to income in the period in which the impairment is identified. Goodwill is 
stated at cost less accumulated impairment losses. Subsequent reversals of goodwill impairment are prohibited. 

Upon disposal of a portion of a CGU, the carrying amount of goodwill related to the portion of the CGU sold is included in the 
determination of gains or losses on disposal. The carrying amount is determined based on the relative fair value of the disposed 
portion to the total CGU. 

Other intangibles 
Intangible assets represent identifiable non-monetary assets and are acquired either separately or through a business 
combination, or generated internally. Intangible assets acquired through a business combination are recognized separately from 
goodwill when they are separable or arise from contractual or other legal rights, and their fair value can be measured reliably. 
The cost of a separately acquired intangible asset includes its purchase price and directly attributable costs of preparing the 
asset for its intended use. In respect of internally generated intangible assets, cost includes all directly attributable costs 
necessary to create, produce, and prepare the asset to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management. 
Research and development costs that are not eligible for capitalization are expensed. After initial recognition, an intangible asset 
is carried at its cost less any accumulated amortization and accumulated impairment losses, if any. Intangible assets with a 
finite-life are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives as follows: computer software – 3 to 10 years; 
and customer list and relationships – 10 to 20 years. We do not have any intangible assets with indefinite lives. 

Intangible assets are assessed for indicators of impairment at each reporting period. If there is an indication that an 
intangible asset may be impaired, an impairment test is performed by comparing the carrying amount of the intangible asset to 
its recoverable amount. Where it is not possible to estimate the recoverable amount of an individual asset, we estimate the 
recoverable amount of the CGU to which the asset belongs. If the recoverable amount of the asset (or CGU) is less than its 
carrying amount, the carrying amount of the intangible asset is written down to its recoverable amount as an impairment loss. 

An impairment loss recognized previously is reversed if there is a change in the estimates used to determine the recoverable 
amount of the asset (or CGU) since the last impairment loss was recognized. If an impairment loss is subsequently reversed, the 
carrying amount of the asset (or CGU) is revised to the lower of its recoverable amount and the carrying amount that would have 
been determined (net of amortization) had there been no prior impairment. 

Due to the subjective nature of these estimates, significant judgment is required in determining the useful lives and 
recoverable amounts of our intangible assets, and assessing whether certain events or circumstances constitute objective 
evidence of impairment. Estimates of the recoverable amounts of our intangible assets rely on certain key inputs, including 
future cash flows and discount rates. Future cash flows are based on sales projections and allocated costs which are estimated 
based on forecast results and business initiatives. Discount rates are based on the bank-wide cost of capital, adjusted for asset-
specific risks. Changes in these assumptions may impact the amount of impairment loss recognized in Non-interest expense. 

154

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Other 
Translation of foreign currencies 
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated into Canadian dollars at rates prevailing at the 
balance sheet date. Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the translation and settlement of these items are 
recognized in Non-interest income in the Consolidated Statements of Income. 

Non-monetary assets and liabilities that are measured at historical cost are translated into Canadian dollars at historical 

rates. 

Assets and liabilities of our foreign operations with functional currencies other than Canadian dollars are translated into 

Canadian dollars at rates prevailing at the balance sheet date, and income and expenses of these foreign operations are 
translated at average rates of exchange for the reporting period. 

Unrealized gains or losses arising as a result of the translation of our foreign operations along with the effective portion of 
related hedges are reported in Other components of equity on an after-tax basis. Upon disposal or partial disposal of a foreign 
operation, an appropriate portion of the accumulated net translation gains or losses is included in Non-interest income. 

Premises and equipment 
Premises and equipment includes land, buildings, leasehold improvements, computer equipment, furniture, fixtures and other 
equipment, and are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation, except for land which is not depreciated, and accumulated 
impairment losses. Cost comprises the purchase price, any costs directly attributable to bringing the asset to the location and 
condition necessary for its intended use, and the initial estimate of any disposal costs. Depreciation is recorded principally on a 
straight–line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which are 25 to 50 years for buildings, 3 to 10 years for computer 
equipment, and 5 to 10 years for furniture, fixtures and other equipment. The amortization period for leasehold improvements is 
the lesser of the useful life of the leasehold improvements or the lease term plus the first renewal period, if reasonably assured 
of renewal. Depreciation methods, useful lives, and residual values are reassessed at each reporting period and adjusted as 
appropriate. Gains and losses on disposal are recorded in Non–interest income. 

Premises and equipment are assessed for indicators of impairment at each reporting period. If there is an indication that an 

asset may be impaired, an impairment test is performed by comparing the asset’s carrying amount to its recoverable amount. 
After the recognition of impairment, the depreciation charge is adjusted in future periods to reflect the asset’s revised 

carrying amount. If an impairment is later reversed, the carrying amount of the asset is revised to the lower of the asset’s 
recoverable amount and the carrying amount that would have been determined (net of depreciation) had there been no prior 
impairment loss. The depreciation charge in future periods is adjusted to reflect the revised carrying amount. 

Right-of-use assets are also included in premises and equipment. 

Leasing 
At inception of a contract, we assess whether a contract is or contains a lease. A contract is, or contains, a lease if the contract 
conveys the right to obtain substantially all of the economic benefits from, and direct the use of, an identified asset for a period 
of time in return for consideration. 

When we are the lessee in a lease arrangement, we initially record a right-of-use asset and corresponding lease liability, 
except for short-term leases and leases of low-value assets. Short-term leases are leases with a lease term of 12 months or less. 
Low-value assets are unspecialized, common, technologically unsophisticated, widely available, and widely used 
non-infrastructure assets. For short-term leases and leases of low-value assets, we record the lease payments as an operating 
expense on a straight-line basis over the lease term. 

Where we are reasonably certain to exercise extension and termination options, they are included in the lease term. 
The lease liability is initially measured at the present value of the lease payments that are not paid at the commencement 

date, discounted at our incremental borrowing rate. The lease liability is subsequently measured at amortized cost using the 
effective interest method, recorded in Interest expense. 

The right-of-use asset is initially measured based on the initial amount of the lease liability, adjusted for lease payments 

made on or before the commencement date, initial direct costs incurred, and an estimate of costs to dismantle, remove, or 
restore the asset, less any lease incentives received. Costs related to dismantling and removing leasehold improvements are 
capitalized as part of the leasehold improvement asset (rather than the right-of-use asset of the lease) when the leasehold 
improvements are separately capitalized. 

The right-of-use asset is depreciated to the earlier of the lease term and the useful life, unless ownership will transfer to RBC 

or we are reasonably certain to exercise a purchase option, in which case the useful life of the right-of-use asset is used. We 
apply IAS 36 Impairment of assets to determine whether a right-of-use asset is impaired and account for any identified 
impairment loss as described in the premises and equipment accounting policies above. 

Provisions 
Provisions are liabilities of uncertain timing or amount and are recognized when we have a present legal or constructive 
obligation as a result of a past event, it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation, and a 
reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation. Provisions are measured as the best estimate of the consideration 
required to settle the present obligation at the reporting date. Significant judgment is required in determining whether a present 
obligation exists and in estimating the probability, timing and amount of any outflows. We record provisions related to litigation, 
asset retirement obligations and other items. 

We are required to estimate the results of ongoing legal proceedings, and expenses to be incurred to dispose of capital 
assets. The forward-looking nature of these estimates requires us to use a significant amount of judgment in projecting the 
timing and amount of future cash flows. We record our provisions on the basis of all available information at the end of the 
reporting period and make adjustments on a quarterly basis to reflect current expectations. It may not be possible to predict the 
resolution of these matters or the timing of their ultimate resolution. Should actual results differ from our expectations, we may 
incur expenses in excess of the provisions recognized. Where appropriate, we apply judgment in limiting the extent of our 
provisions-related disclosures as not to prejudice our positions in matters of dispute. 

When some or all of the economic benefits required to settle a provision are expected to be recovered from a third party, 

such as an insurer, a separate asset is recognized if it is virtually certain that reimbursement will be received. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

155 

Note 2 Summary of significant accounting policies, estimates and judgments (continued)  

Commissions and fees 
Commissions and fees primarily relate to Investment management and custodial fees, Mutual fund revenue, Securities brokerage 
commissions, Services charges, Underwriting and other advisory fees, Card service revenue and Credit fees, and are recognized 
based on the applicable service contracts with clients. 

Investment management and custodial fees and Mutual fund revenue are generally calculated as a percentage of daily or 

period-end net asset values (NAV) based on the terms of the contract with clients and are received monthly, quarterly, 
semiannually or annually, depending on the terms of the contract. Investment management and custodial fees are generally 
derived from assets under management (AUM) when our clients solicit the investment capabilities of an investment manager or 
from assets under administration (AUA) where the investment strategy is directed by the client or a designated third-party 
manager. Mutual fund revenue is generally derived from the daily NAV of the mutual funds. Investment management and 
custodial fees and Mutual fund revenue are recognized over time when the service is provided to the client, provided that it is 
highly probable that a significant reversal in the amount of revenue recognized will not occur. 

Commissions earned on Securities brokerage services and Service charges that are related to the provision of specific 

transaction-type services are recognized when the service is fulfilled. Where services are provided over time, revenue is 
recognized as the services are provided. 

Underwriting and other advisory fees primarily relate to underwriting of new issuances of debt or equity and various 

advisory services. Underwriting fees are generally expressed as a percentage of the funds raised through issuance and are 
recognized when the service has been completed. Advisory fees vary depending on the scope and type of engagement and can be 
fixed in nature or contingent on a future event. Advisory fees are recognized over the period in which the service is provided and 
are recognized only to the extent that it is highly probable that a significant reversal in the amount of revenue will not occur. 

Card service revenue primarily includes interchange revenue and annual card fees. Interchange revenue is calculated as a 
fixed percentage of the transaction amount and recognized when the card transaction is settled. Annual card fees are fixed fees 
and are recognized over a 12 month period. 

Credit fees are primarily earned for arranging syndicated loans and making credit available on undrawn facilities. The timing 

of the recognition of credit fees varies based on the nature of the services provided. 

When service fees and other costs are incurred in relation to commissions and fees earned, we record these costs on a gross 
basis in either Non-interest expense – Other or Non-interest expense – Human resources based on our assessment of whether we 
have primary responsibility to fulfill the contract with the client and have discretion in establishing the price for the commissions 
and fees earned, which may require judgment. 

Earnings per share 
Earnings per share is computed by dividing Net income available to common shareholders by the weighted average number of 
common shares outstanding for the period. Net income available to common shareholders is determined after deducting 
dividend entitlements of preferred shareholders and distributions on other equity instruments, any gains (losses) on redemption 
of preferred shares and other equity instruments net of related income taxes and the net income attributable to non-controlling 
interests. 

Diluted earnings per share reflects the potential dilution that could occur if additional common shares are assumed to be 

issued under securities or contracts that entitle their holders to obtain common shares in the future, to the extent such 
entitlement is not subject to unresolved contingencies. For contracts that may be settled in cash or in common shares at our 
option, diluted earnings per share is calculated based on the assumption that such contracts will be settled in shares. Income 
and expenses associated with these types of contracts are excluded from the Net income available to common shareholders, and 
the additional number of shares that would be issued is included in the diluted earnings per share calculation. For stock options 
whose exercise price is less than the average market price of our common shares, using the treasury stock method, they are 
assumed to be exercised and the proceeds are used to repurchase common shares at the average market price for the period. 
The incremental number of common shares issued under stock options and repurchased from proceeds is included in the 
calculation of diluted earnings per share. 

Share capital and other equity instruments 
We classify a financial instrument that we issue as a financial asset, financial liability or an equity instrument in accordance with 
the substance of the contractual arrangement. 

Our common shares held by us are classified as treasury shares in equity and accounted for at weighted average cost. Upon 

the sale of treasury shares, the difference between the sale proceeds and the cost of the shares is recognized in Retained 
earnings. Financial instruments issued by us are classified as equity instruments when there is no contractual obligation to 
transfer cash or other financial assets. Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of equity instruments are included in 
equity as a deduction from the proceeds, net of tax. Financial instruments that will be settled by a variable number of our 
common shares upon their conversion by the holders as well as the related accrued distributions are classified as liabilities on 
our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Dividends and yield distributions on these instruments are classified as Interest expense in our 
Consolidated Statements of Income. For compound instruments comprised of both liability and equity components, the liability 
component is initially measured at fair value with any residual amount assigned to the equity component. 

Future changes in accounting policy and disclosure 
The following standard has been issued, but is not yet effective for us. 

IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts (IFRS 17) 
In May 2017, the IASB issued IFRS 17 to establish a comprehensive insurance standard which provides guidance on the 
recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosures of insurance contracts. IFRS 17 requires entities to measure insurance 
contract liabilities at their current fulfillment values using one of three approaches depending on the nature of the contract. In 
June 2020, the IASB issued amendments to IFRS 17, including deferral of the effective date by two years. This new standard will be 
effective for us on November 1, 2023 and will be applied retrospectively with restatement of comparatives. If full retrospective 

156

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

application to a group of contracts is impracticable, the modified retrospective or fair value approach may be used. To manage 
the transition to IFRS 17, we established a comprehensive program and governance structure led by Finance and the Insurance 
business that focuses on the evaluation of the impacts of the standard and implementation of policies, systems and processes 
required for the adoption. Significant progress has been made in preparing for the implementation of IFRS 17. We expect the 
adoption of IFRS 17 to affect the timing of earnings recognition for our insurance contracts and the carrying amount of our 
insurance contract liabilities. We continue to assess the impacts of adopting IFRS 17 on our Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Updates related to interest rate benchmark reform 
On May 16, 2022, Refinitiv Benchmark Services (UK) Limited (RBSL), the administrator of CDOR, announced that the calculation 
and publication of all tenors of CDOR will permanently cease immediately following a final publication on June 28, 2024. The 
cessation announcement triggered fallback provisions related to our CDOR-linked products, including certain loans, bonds, and 
derivatives, and defined the dates of their transition to ABRs. The fixed spreads to be used in the transition to the relevant ABR 
for each CDOR setting were also defined for certain of our CDOR-linked products as a result of the announcement. 

Progress in and risks arising from the transition to ABRs 
To manage our transition to ABRs, we have implemented a comprehensive enterprise-wide program and governance structure 
that addresses the key areas of impact including contract remediation, funding and liquidity planning, risk management, 
financial reporting and valuation, systems, processes and client education and communication. Transition activities are focused 
on two broad streams of work: (i) developing new ABR linked products, and (ii) conversion of existing USD LIBOR and CDOR 
based contracts to ABRs. Our program timelines are ultimately dependent on broader market acceptance of products that 
reference the new ABRs and our clients’ readiness and ability to adopt the replacement products. Significant matters that we 
continue to evaluate include client product offerings, short and long-term funding strategies, and our hedging programs. We 
continue to work towards the recommended target dates for the cessation of USD LIBOR and CDOR based products provided by 
our regulators and are on track with our transition activities to move to ABRs. 

The following tables show the Bank’s significant exposures to financial instruments referencing benchmark interest rates subject 
to the Reform that have yet to transition to ABRs. These include financial instruments referencing USD LIBOR maturing after 
June 30, 2023 and CDOR maturing after June 28, 2024. In the normal course of business, our derivative notional amounts may 
fluctuate with minimal impact to our IBOR conversion plans. 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

USD LIBOR  
CDOR (5)  

Cross currency swaps  
USD LIBOR – CDOR  

Non-derivative  
financial assets (1)  
$

57,494   $ 
18,493  

75,987   $

  
n.a.  

n.a.  

$

$

October 31, 2022   

October 31, 2021  

Non-derivative  
financial liabilities (2)  

Derivative  
notional (3)  

Non-derivative  
financial assets (1)  

Non-derivative  
financial liabilities (2)  

As at  

1,468   $ 5,550,175   $

18,572  
20,040   $ 7,554,619   $

2,004,444  

68,325   $
9,226  

77,551   $

  
n.a.   $

  
222,256  

n.a.   $

222,256  

  
n.a.  

n.a.  

Derivative  
notional (3), (4)  
1,420   $ 4,901,854  
1,307,071  

14,797  

16,217   $ 6,208,925  

  
n.a.   $

  
206,953  

n.a.   $

206,953  

75,987   $

20,040   $ 7,776,875   $

77,551   $

16,217   $ 6,415,878  

Non-derivative assets represent the drawn outstanding balance of Loans and Customers’ liability under acceptances and the fair value of Securities. 

(1) 
(2)  Non-derivative liabilities represent Subordinated debentures, Deposits and Acceptances. 
(3) 
(4)  Amounts have been updated from those previously presented to reflect the regulatory developments related to the cessation of CDOR and transition of non-USD LIBOR 

The notional amount for cross currency swaps between USD LIBOR and CDOR are presented separately in the Cross currency swaps section of this table. 

financial instruments. 
Includes our exposure to financial instruments referencing interest rates substantially similar to CDOR. 

(5) 
n.a.  not applicable 

The following table presents the undrawn balances of loan commitments referencing benchmark interest rates subject to the 
Reform. 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Authorized and committed undrawn commitments  

USD LIBOR  
CDOR (1), (2)  

As at   

October 31, 2022   October 31, 2021  
  
  
122,437  
15,644  

59,271   $
26,913  

$

$

86,184   $

138,081  

Includes our exposure to financial instruments referencing interest rates substantially similar to CDOR. 

(1) 
(2)  Undrawn commitments exclude amounts related to drawn outstanding balances, which in certain cases may exclude extension options. 

Consistent with our transition plan, our exposure to non-derivative financial assets, non-derivative financial liabilities, derivative 
notional and undrawn balances of loan commitments referencing non-USD LIBOR interest rates is no longer material to our 
financial statements (October 31, 2021 – $3.6 billion, $3.4 billion, $2,975.4 billion and $3.0 billion, respectively). We continue to 
manage significant exposures to benchmarks that have no announced plans for cessation or further reform, including the EURO 
Interbank Offered Rate (EURIBOR) and Australian Bank Bill Swap Rate (BBSW), which are excluded from the tables above. 

  

  

  
  

  

  

  

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

157 

Note 3 Fair value of financial instruments  

Carrying value and fair value of financial instruments 
The following tables provide a comparison of the carrying and fair values for each classification of financial instruments. 
Embedded derivatives are presented on a combined basis with the host contracts. For measurement purposes, they are carried 
at fair value when conditions requiring separation are met. 

  
  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Financial assets  
Interest-bearing deposits with banks  

As at October 31, 2022  

Carrying value and fair value  

   Carrying value     

Fair value  

  

  

Financial  
instruments  
classified as  
FVTPL  

Financial  
instruments  
designated as  
FVTPL  

Financial  
instruments  
classified as  
FVOCI  

Financial  
instruments  
designated as  

FVOCI     

Financial  
instruments  
measured at  
amortized cost     

Financial  
instruments  
measured at  
amortized cost  

Total  
carrying  
amount  

Total  
fair value  

$

  
–  $

  

84,468  $

  
–  $

     
–      $

    

23,543    $

  

  
23,543  $ 108,011  $ 108,011  

  

Securities  
Trading  
Investment, net of applicable allowance  

  
138,507  
–  

  
9,698  
–  

  
–  
92,063  

    
–    
77,127    

  
–  
70,073  

  
148,205  
170,018  

  
148,205  
162,964  

138,507  

9,698  

92,063  

77,127    

70,073  

318,223  

311,169  

Assets purchased under reverse repurchase  

agreements and securities borrowed  

264,665  

Loans, net of applicable allowance  

Retail  
Wholesale  

  

Other  

Derivatives  
Other assets (1)  

Financial liabilities  
Deposits  

Personal  
Business and government (2)  
Bank (3)  

  

Other  

Obligations related to securities sold short  
Obligations related to assets sold under  
repurchase agreements and securities  
loaned  
Derivatives  
Other liabilities (4)  

Subordinated debentures  

  
73  
6,914  

6,987  

  
154,439  
3,377  

–  

  
375  
3,222  

3,597  

  
–  
–  

$

  
  

298  $
447  
–  

  
  
21,959  
152,119  
7,196  

745  

181,274  

  
35,511  

  
–  

–  
153,491  
(360)  
–  

248,835  
–  
69  
–  

–  

  
218  
563  

781  

  
–  
–  

  
  
  
  
  

  

  
  

  
  
  
  

     
–     
828     

828     

–     

     
–     
–     

–     

     
–     
–     

     
     
      $
     
     

     

     
     

     
     
     
     

53,180    

53,180  

317,845  

317,845  

    
546,767    
261,833    

  
521,428  
253,816  

  
547,433  
272,532  

  
522,094  
264,515  

808,600    

775,244  

819,965  

786,609  

    
–    
73,084    

  
–  
73,084  

  
154,439  
76,461  

  
154,439  
76,461  

    
    

382,675    $
607,304    
36,816    

  
  

  
  

  
  
380,396  $ 404,932  $ 402,653  
757,668  
759,870  
605,102  
43,954  
44,012  
36,758  

1,026,795    

1,022,256   1,208,814   1,204,275  

    
–    

  
–  

  
35,511  

  
35,511  

25,112    
–    
90,348    
10,025    

25,112  
–  
90,160  
9,668  

273,947  
153,491  
90,057  
10,025  

273,947  
153,491  
89,869  
9,668  

158

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

  

  

  

  

  
  

  

  

As at October 31, 2021  

Carrying value and fair value  

   Carrying value     

Fair value  

  

  

Financial  
instruments  
classified as  
FVTPL  

Financial  
instruments  
designated as  
FVTPL  

Financial  
instruments  
classified as  
FVOCI  

Financial  
instruments  
designated as  

FVOCI     

Financial  
instruments  
measured at  
amortized cost     

Financial  
instruments  
measured at  
amortized cost  

Total  
carrying  
amount  

Financial assets  
Interest-bearing deposits with banks  

$

  
–  $

  

56,896  $

  
–  $

     
–      $

    

  

  

22,742    $

22,742  $

79,638  $

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Securities  
Trading  
Investment, net of applicable allowance  

Assets purchased under reverse repurchase  

agreements and securities borrowed  

265,011  

Loans, net of applicable allowance  

Retail  
Wholesale  

  

Other  

Derivatives  
Other assets (1)  

Financial liabilities  
Deposits  

  
125,801  
–  

  
13,439  
–  

  
–  
77,802  

125,801  

13,439  

77,802  

  
–  
8,428  

8,428  

  
95,541  
4,109  

–  

  
241  
2,769  

3,010  

  
–  
–  

–  

  
327  
813  

1,140  

  
–  
–  

Personal  
Business and government (2)  
Bank (3)  

  

Other  

Obligations related to securities sold short  
Obligations related to assets sold under  
repurchase agreements and securities  
loaned  
Derivatives  
Other liabilities (4)  

Subordinated debentures  

$

  
  

321  $
739  
–  

  
  
18,328  
131,630  
17,251  

1,060  

167,209  

  
37,841  

–  
91,439  
654  
–  

  
–  

236,147  
–  
171  
–  

  
  
  
  
  

  

  
  

  
  
  
  

Total  
fair value  

  
79,638  

  
139,240  
145,158  

     
–     
533     

533     

–     

     
–     
–     

–     

     
–     
–     

     
     
      $
     
     

     

     
     

     
     
     
     

    
–    
67,149    

67,149    

  
–  
66,823  

  
139,240  
145,484  

66,823  

284,724  

284,398  

42,892    

42,892  

307,903  

307,903  

    
500,621    
204,376    

  
502,277  
204,683  

  
501,189  
216,386  

  
502,845  
216,693  

704,997    

706,960  

717,575  

719,538  

    
–    
58,483    

    
    

  
–  
58,483  

  
95,541  
62,592  

  
  

  
  

343,839    $
563,984    
24,739    

344,040  $
565,106  
24,743  

362,488  $
696,353  
41,990  

  
95,541  
62,592  

  
  
362,689  
697,475  
41,994  

932,562    

933,889   1,100,831   1,102,158  

    
–    

  
–  

  
37,841  

  
37,841  

26,054    
–    
64,746    
9,593    

26,054  
–  
64,749  
9,601  

262,201  
91,439  
65,571  
9,593  

262,201  
91,439  
65,574  
9,601  

Includes Customers’ liability under acceptances and financial instruments recognized in Other assets. 

(1) 
(2)  Business and government deposits include deposits from regulated deposit-taking institutions other than banks. 
(3)  Bank deposits refer to deposits from regulated banks and central banks. 
(4) 

Includes Acceptances and financial instruments recognized in Other liabilities. 

Financial assets designated as fair value through profit or loss 
For our financial assets designated as FVTPL, we measure the change in fair value attributable to changes in credit risk as the 
difference between the total change in the fair value of the instrument during the period and the change in fair value calculated 
using the appropriate risk-free yield curves. For the year ended October 31, 2022, the change in fair value during the period 
attributable to changes in credit risk for positions still held was a loss of $662 million and the cumulative change in fair value 
attributable to changes in credit risk for positions still held was a loss of $490 million. For the year ended October 31, 2021, the 
change in fair value during the period attributable to changes in credit risk for positions still held was a gain of $613 million and 
the cumulative change in fair value attributable to changes in credit risk for positions still held was a gain of $173 million. As at 
October 31, 2022, the extent to which credit derivatives or similar instruments mitigate the maximum exposure to credit risk was 
$589 million (October 31, 2021 – $484 million). 

Financial liabilities designated as fair value through profit or loss 
For our financial liabilities designated as FVTPL, we take into account changes in our own credit spread and the expected 
duration of the instrument to measure the change in fair value attributable to changes in credit risk. 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Term deposits  
Personal  
Business and government (3)  
Bank (4)  

Obligations related to assets sold under  

repurchase agreements and securities loaned  

Other liabilities  

As at or for the year ended October 31, 2022 (1)  

Contractual  
maturity  
amount   Carrying value  
  
21,959  
152,119  
7,196  

160,775  
7,208  

22,328   $

  

$

Difference  
between  
carrying value  
and contractual  
maturity amount  
  
(369)  
(8,656)  
(12)  

$

Changes in fair value attributable  
to changes in credit risk included  
in OCI for positions still held  

During the period  
  
(238)  
(2,135)  
–  

$

Cumulative (2)  
  
(166)  
(1,718)  
–  

$

190,311  

181,274  

(9,037)  

(2,373)  

(1,884)  

248,963  
69  

248,835  
69  

(128)  
–  

1  
–  

1  
–  

$ 439,343   $ 430,178  

$ (9,165)  

$ (2,372)  

$ (1,883)  

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

159 

Note 3 Fair value of financial instruments (continued)  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Term deposits  
Personal  
Business and government (3)  
Bank (4)  

$

Contractual  
maturity  
amount   Carrying value  
  
18,328  
131,630  
17,251  

131,830  
17,253  

18,205   $

  

167,288  

167,209  

As at or for the year ended October 31, 2021 (1)  

Difference  
between  
carrying value  
and contractual  
maturity amount  
  
$ 123  
(200)  
(2)  

(79)  

(17)  
–  

Changes in fair value attributable  
to changes in credit risk included  
in OCI for positions still held  

During the period  
  
(17)  
(75)  
–  

$

Cumulative (2)  
  
$ 72  
416  
–  

(92)  

488  

(8)  
–  

–  
–  

Obligations related to assets sold under  

repurchase agreements and securities loaned  

Other liabilities  

236,164  
171  

236,147  
171  

(1) 

(2) 

$97 million in changes in fair value attributable to changes in credit risk were recognized in income for the year ended October 31, 2022, and $97 million in cumulative 
changes in credit risk were included in income for positions still held life-to-date (October 31, 2021 – $nil and $nil respectively). 
The cumulative change is measured from the initial designation of the liabilities as FVTPL. For the year ended October 31, 2022, $3 million of fair value gains previously 
included in OCI relate to financial liabilities derecognized during the year (October 31, 2021 – $25 million of fair value losses). 
(3)  Business and government term deposits include amounts from regulated deposit-taking institutions other than regulated banks. 
(4)  Bank term deposits refer to amounts from regulated banks and central banks. 

$

403,623   $ 403,527  

$

(96)  

$ (100)  

$ 488  

Net gains (losses) from financial instruments classified and designated as fair value through profit or loss 
Financial instruments classified as FVTPL, which includes mainly trading securities, derivatives, trading liabilities, and financial 
assets and liabilities designated as FVTPL are measured at fair value with realized and unrealized gains and losses recognized in 
Non-interest income. 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Net gains (losses) (1)  

Classified as fair value through profit or loss (2)  
Designated as fair value through profit or loss (3)  

By product line (1)  

Interest rate and credit (4)  
Equities  
Foreign exchange and commodities  

For the year ended  

October 31  

October 31  
2021  

2022     
     

(7,382)     $
8,543     

  
3,447  
(1,407)  

1,161      $

2,040  

     

1,251      $
(843)    
753     

  
1,033  
57  
950  

$

1,161      $

2,040  

$

$

$

For the year ended  

October 31  
2021  

October 31  

2022     
     

$ 10,999      $

1,177     
28,595     

40,771     

$

     

8,336      $
9,718     

18,054     
$ 22,717      $

  
4,551  
375  
23,219  

28,145  

  
2,865  
5,278  

8,143  

20,002  

Excludes the following amounts related to our insurance operations and included in Insurance premiums, investment and fee income in the Consolidated Statements of 
Income: Net losses from financial instruments designated as FVTPL of $2,805 million (October 31, 2021 – losses of $14 million). 
Excludes derivatives designated in a hedging relationship. Refer to Note 9 for net gains (losses) on these derivatives. 
For the year ended October 31, 2022, $8,536 million of net fair value gains on financial liabilities designated as FVTPL, other than those attributable to changes in our own 
credit risk, were included in Non-interest income (October 31, 2021 – losses of $1,408 million). 
Includes gains (losses) recognized on cross currency interest rate swaps. 

Net interest income from financial instruments 
Interest and dividend income arising from financial assets and financial liabilities and the associated costs of funding are 
reported in Net interest income. 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Interest and dividend income (1), (2)  

Financial instruments measured at fair value through profit or loss  
Financial instruments measured at fair value through other comprehensive income  
Financial instruments measured at amortized cost  

Interest expense (1)  

Financial instruments measured at fair value through profit or loss  
Financial instruments measured at amortized cost (3)  

Net interest income  

Excludes the following amounts related to our insurance operations and included in Insurance premiums, investment and fee income in the Consolidated Statements of 
Income: Interest income of $601 million (October 31, 2021 – $576 million), and Interest expense of $6 million (October 31, 2021 – $4 million). 
Includes dividend income for the year ended October 31, 2022 of $2,954 million (October 31, 2021 – $2,436 million), which is presented in Interest and dividend income in 
the Consolidated Statements of Income. 
Includes interest expense on lease liabilities for the year ended October 31, 2022 of $112 million (October 31, 2021 – $110 million). 

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

(1) 

(2) 
(3) 

(4) 

  

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

160

Fee income arising from financial instruments 
For the year ended October 31, 2022, we earned $6,118 million in fees from banking services (October 31, 2021 – $5,583 million). For 
the year ended October 31, 2022, we also earned $14,932 million in fees from investment management, trust, custodial, 
underwriting, brokerage and other similar fiduciary services to retail and institutional clients (October 31, 2021 – $15,167 million). 
These fees are included in Non-interest income. 

Fair value of assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis and classified using the fair value hierarchy 

October 31, 2022  

October 31, 2021  

Fair value  
measurements using  

Level 1  

Level 2  

Level 3  

adjustments   Fair value  

   Level 1  

Level 2  

Level 3  

adjustments   Fair value  

Netting  

Netting  

  

  

$

–   $ 84,468   $

  
–   $

  
  
   $ 84,468  

  
  $

  

  

  

–   $ 56,896   $

–   $  

  
$ 56,896  

As at  

  

  

Fair value  
measurements using  

  

  

  

  

  
(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Financial assets  
Interest-bearing deposits with banks  

Securities  
Trading  

Debt issued or guaranteed by:  
Canadian government (1)  

Federal  
Provincial and municipal  

U.S. federal, state, municipal and agencies (1), (2)  
Other OECD government (3)  
Mortgage-backed securities (1)  
Asset-backed securities  

Non-CDO securities (4)  

Corporate debt and other debt  
Equities  

U.S. federal, state, municipal and agencies (1), (2)  
Other OECD government  

Investment  

Debt issued or guaranteed by:  
Canadian government (1)  

Federal  
Provincial and municipal  

Mortgage-backed securities (1)  
Asset-backed securities  

CDO  
Non-CDO securities  

Corporate debt and other debt  
Equities  

securities borrowed  

Loans  
Other  

Derivatives  

Interest rate contracts  
Foreign exchange contracts  
Credit derivatives  
Other contracts  
Valuation adjustments  

Total gross derivatives  
Netting adjustments  

Total derivatives  
Other assets  

  

Financial liabilities  

Deposits  

Personal  
Business and government  
Bank  

Other  

securities loaned  

Derivatives  

Interest rate contracts  
Foreign exchange contracts  
Credit derivatives  
Other contracts  
Valuation adjustments  

Total gross derivatives  
Netting adjustments  

Total derivatives  
Other liabilities  

  

(1) 

Obligations related to securities sold short  
Obligations related to assets sold under repurchase agreements and  

64,195  

82,123  

1,887  

148,205  

   68,747  

68,911  

1,582  

139,240  

  
  
  
  
15,024  
–  
1,254  
1,325  
–  
  
–  
–  
46,592  

  
  
  
1,226  
–  
440  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
–  
36  

–  
–  
  
  
–  
–  
–  
3,939  
–  

  
  
  
  
3,779  
13,257  
35,570  
3,452  
2  
  
1,308  
21,162  
3,593  

  
  
  
2,555  
2,124  
43,918  
5,144  
2,860  
  
7,524  
524  
25,569  
395  

264,665  
9,673  
  
  
39,804  
99,424  
388  
14,786  
(2,100)  

3,939  
  

152,302  
  

  
1,221  

  
2,141  

  
  
  
  
–  
–  
4  
–  
–  
  
2  
7  
1,874  

  
  
  
–  
–  
–  
–  
28  
  
–  
–  
151  
397  

576  

–  
1,692  
  
  
263  
13  
–  
62  
45  

383  
  

  
15  

  
  
  
  
18,803  
13,257  
36,828  
4,777  
2  
  
1,310  
21,169  
52,059  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
8,977  
  
–  
  
215  
  
2,729  
  
–  
  
  
  
–  
  
  
–  
   56,826  

  
  
  
3,781  
2,124  
44,358  
5,144  
2,888  
  
7,524  
524  
25,720  
828  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

  
  
  
1,973  
–  
12  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
–  
46  

  
  
  
  
2,380  
11,068  
22,738  
5,730  
4  
  
891  
23,085  
3,015  

  
  
  
1,730  
3,132  
34,815  
5,956  
2,727  
  
7,074  
586  
19,625  
153  

  
264,665  
  
11,365  
  
  
  
  
  
40,067  
  
99,437  
  
388  
  
18,787  
(2,055)     

–  
–  
  
  
–  
–  
–  
3,175  
–  

265,011  
11,501  
  
  
33,857  
41,224  
34  
17,955  
(819)  

154,439  
3,377  

  
  

  
1,474  

  
2,635  

  
  
  
  
–  
–  
25  
–  
–  
  
2  
25  
1,530  

  
  
  
–  
–  
–  
–  
20  
  
–  
–  
152  
334  

506  

–  
1,077  
  
  
320  
74  
–  
26  
9  

429  
  

  
–  

  
(2,185)  

156,624  

  
(2,185)     

3,175  
  

92,251  
  

  
(314)  

95,855  
(314)  

$71,057   $685,985   $ 4,553   $

(2,185)   $ 759,410  

  $75,427   $573,003   $ 3,594   $

(314)   $ 651,710  

  
  

  
  

$

–   $ 22,016   $
–  
–  
  
16,383  

152,566  
7,196  
  
19,128  

  
  
241   $
–  
–  
  
–  

–  
  
–  
–  
–  
3,847  
–  

248,835  
  
39,592  
94,310  
125  
16,663  
(967)  

–  
  
1,122  
145  
–  
847  
(8)  

  
  
  
  
   $ 22,257  
152,566  
  
7,196  
  
  
  
35,511  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  
–   $ 18,498   $
  $
–  
  
–  
  
  
  
   18,345  

132,369  
17,251  
  
19,496  

  
  
151   $  
–  
–  
  
–  

248,835  
  
40,714  
94,455  
125  
21,357  

  
  
  
  
  
  
(975)     

–  
  
–  
–  
–  
3,699  
–  

236,147  
  
28,566  
40,484  
120  
17,456  
38  

–  
  
955  
27  
–  
419  
(11)  

3,847  
  

149,723  
  

2,106  
  

  
(2,185)  

155,676  

  
(2,185)     

3,699  
  

86,664  
  

1,390  
  

  
(314)  

91,753  
(314)  

  
341  

  
(632)  

  
–  

153,491  

  
(291)     

  
258  

  
560  

  
7  

91,439  
825  

$20,571   $598,832   $ 2,347   $

(2,185)   $ 619,565  

  $22,302   $510,985   $ 1,548   $

(314)   $ 534,521  

  
  
  
  
11,357  
11,068  
22,978  
8,459  
4  
  
893  
23,110  
61,371  

  
  
  
3,703  
3,132  
34,827  
5,956  
2,747  
  
7,074  
586  
19,777  
533  

78,335  

265,011  
12,578  
  
  
34,177  
41,298  
34  
21,156  
(810)  

95,541  
4,109  

  
  
$ 18,649  
132,369  
17,251  
  
37,841  

236,147  
  
29,521  
40,511  
120  
21,574  
27  

  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  

Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and  

1,702  

90,613  

92,891  

2,031  

75,798  

As at October 31, 2022, residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities (MBS) included in all fair value levels of trading securities were $12,273 million and $nil 
(October 31, 2021 – $13,124 million and $nil), respectively, and in all fair value levels of Investment securities were $23,362 million and $2,755 million (October 31, 2021 – 
$13,542 million and $2,592 million), respectively. 

(2)  United States (U.S.). 
(3)  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 
(4)  Collateralized debt obligations (CDO). 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

161 

Note 3 Fair value of financial instruments (continued)  

Fair values of our significant assets and liabilities measured on a recurring basis are determined and classified in the fair value 
hierarchy table using the following valuation techniques and inputs. 

Interest-bearing deposits with banks 
The majority of our Interest-bearing deposits with banks are designated as FVTPL. These FVTPL deposits are composed of short-
dated deposits placed with banks, and are included in Interest-bearing deposits with banks in the fair value hierarchy table. The 
fair values of these instruments are determined using the discounted cash flow method. The inputs to the valuation models 
include interest rate swap curves and credit spreads, where applicable. They are classified as Level 2 instruments in the 
hierarchy as the inputs are observable. 

Government bonds (Canadian, U.S. and other OECD governments) 
Government bonds are included in Canadian government debt, U.S. federal, state, municipal and agencies debt, Other OECD 
government debt and Obligations related to securities sold short in the fair value hierarchy table. The fair values of government 
issued or guaranteed debt securities in active markets are determined by reference to recent transaction prices, broker quotes, 
or third-party vendor prices and are classified as Level 1 in the hierarchy. The fair values of securities that are not traded in 
active markets are based on either security prices, or valuation techniques using implied yields and risk spreads derived from 
prices of actively traded and similar government securities. Securities with observable prices or rate inputs as compared to 
transaction prices, dealer quotes or vendor prices are classified as Level 2 in the hierarchy. Securities where inputs are 
unobservable are classified as Level 3 in the hierarchy. 

Corporate and U.S. municipal bonds 
The fair values of corporate and U.S. municipal bonds, which are included in Corporate debt and other debt, U.S. federal, state, 
municipal and agencies debt and Obligations related to securities sold short in the fair value hierarchy table, are determined 
using either recently executed transaction prices, broker quotes, pricing services, or in certain instances, the discounted cash 
flow method using rate inputs such as benchmark yields (CDOR, Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) and other similar 
reference rates) and risk spreads of comparable securities. Securities with observable prices or rate inputs are classified as 
Level 2 in the hierarchy. Securities where inputs are unobservable are classified as Level 3 in the hierarchy. 

Asset-backed securities and Mortgage-backed securities 
Asset-backed securities (ABS) and MBS are included in Asset-backed securities, Mortgage-backed securities, Canadian 
government debt, U.S. federal, state, municipal and agencies debt, and Obligations related to securities sold short in the fair 
value hierarchy table. Inputs for valuation of ABS and MBS are, when available, traded prices, dealer or lead manager quotes, 
broker quotes and vendor prices of the identical securities. When prices of the identical securities are not readily available, we 
use industry standard models with inputs such as discount margins, yields, default, prepayment and loss severity rates that are 
implied from transaction prices, dealer quotes or vendor prices of comparable instruments. Where security prices and inputs are 
observable, ABS and MBS are classified as Level 2 in the hierarchy. Otherwise, they are classified as Level 3 in the hierarchy. 

Equities 
Equities consist of listed and unlisted common shares, private equities, mutual funds and hedge funds with certain redemption 
restrictions and are included in equities and obligations for securities sold short. The fair values of common shares are based on 
quoted prices in active markets, where available, and are classified as Level 1 in the hierarchy. Where quoted prices in active 
markets are not readily available, fair value is determined based on quoted market prices for similar securities or through 
valuation techniques, such as multiples of earnings and the discounted cash flow method with forecasted cash flows and 
discount rate as inputs. Private equities are classified as Level 3 in the hierarchy as their inputs are not observable. Hedge funds 
are valued using Net Asset Values (NAV). If we can redeem a hedge fund at NAV prior to the next quarter end, the fund is 
classified as Level 2 in the hierarchy. Otherwise, it is classified as Level 3 in the hierarchy. 

Loans 
Loans include base metal loans, corporate loans, banker acceptances and asset-backed financing loans. Fair values are 
determined based on market prices, if available, or discounted cash flow method using the following inputs: market interest 
rates, base metal commodity prices, market based spreads of assets with similar credit ratings and terms to maturity, LGD, 
expected default frequency implied from credit derivative prices, if available, and relevant pricing information such as 
contractual rate, origination and maturity dates, redemption price, coupon payment frequency and day count convention. Loans 
with market prices or observable inputs are classified as Level 2 in the hierarchy and loans with unobservable inputs that have 
significant impacts on the fair values are classified as Level 3 in the hierarchy. 

Derivatives 
The fair values of exchange-traded derivatives, such as interest rate and equity options and futures, are based on quoted market 
prices and are typically classified as Level 1 in the hierarchy. OTC derivatives primarily consist of interest rate contracts, foreign 
exchange contracts and credit derivatives. The exchange-traded or OTC interest rate, foreign exchange and equity derivatives 
are included in Interest rate contracts, Foreign exchange contracts and Other contracts, respectively, in the fair value hierarchy 
table. The fair values of OTC derivatives are determined using valuation models when quoted market prices or third-party 
consensus pricing information are not available. The valuation models, such as discounted cash flow method or Black-Scholes 
option model, incorporate observable or unobservable inputs for interest and foreign exchange rates, equity and commodity 
prices (including indices), credit spreads, corresponding market volatility levels, and other market-based pricing factors. Other 
adjustments to fair value include bid-offer, CVA, FVA, OIS, parameter and model uncertainties, and unrealized gain or loss at 
inception of a transaction. A derivative instrument is classified as Level 2 in the hierarchy if observable market inputs are 
available or the unobservable inputs are not significant to the fair value. Otherwise, it is classified as Level 3 in the hierarchy. 

Securities borrowed or purchased under resale agreements and securities loaned or sold under repurchase agreements 
In the fair value hierarchy table, these instruments are included in Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and 
securities borrowed, and Obligations related to assets sold under repurchase agreements and securities loaned. The fair values 

162

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

of these contracts are determined using valuation techniques such as the discounted cash flow method using interest rate 
curves as inputs. They are classified as Level 2 instruments in the hierarchy as the inputs are observable. 

Deposits 
A majority of our deposits are measured at amortized cost but certain deposits are designated as FVTPL. These FVTPL deposits 
include deposits taken from clients, issuances of certificates of deposits and promissory notes, and interest rate and equity 
linked notes. The fair values of these instruments are determined using the discounted cash flow method and derivative option 
valuation models. The inputs to the valuation models include benchmark yield curves, credit spreads, interest rates, equity and 
interest rate volatility, dividends and correlation, where applicable. They are classified as Level 2 or 3 instruments in the 
hierarchy, depending on the significance of the unobservable credit spreads, volatility, dividend and correlation rates. 

Quantitative information about fair value measurements using significant unobservable inputs (Level 3 Instruments) 
The following table presents fair values of our significant Level 3 financial instruments, valuation techniques used to determine 
their fair values, ranges and weighted averages of unobservable inputs. 

As at October 31, 2022 (Millions of Canadian dollars, except for prices, percentages and ratios)  

  

  

Fair value  

  

     

Range of input values (1), (2)  

Products  

Corporate debt and related  

derivatives  

Reporting line in the fair value  
hierarchy table  

Assets   Liabilities  

Valuation  
techniques  

  
Corporate debt and other debt  
Loans  
Derivative related liabilities  

$

  
7  
1,692  

   $

Price-based  
  
   Discounted cash flows  
  
  
  
130  

Government debt and  
municipal bonds  

  
Corporate debt and other debt  

  
  

  
  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

Private equities, hedge fund  
investments and related  
equity derivatives  

Interest rate derivatives and  

interest-rate-linked  
structured notes (6), (7)  

Equity derivatives and equity-

linked structured  
notes (6), (7)  

Other (8)  
  
  
  
  
  

  
Equities  
Derivative related liabilities  
  
  
  

  
Derivative related assets  
Derivative related liabilities  
  

Derivative related assets  
Deposits  
Derivative related liabilities  

  
Asset-backed securities  
Derivative related assets  
Other assets  
Mortgage-backed securities  
U.S. state, municipal and  

agencies debt  

Derivative related liabilities  
Other liabilities  

  

  

  
151  

  
2,271  
  
  
  
  

  
270  
  
  
  

  
62  
  
  

  
2  
51  
15  
28  

4  
  
  

  
  
   Discounted cash flows  

  
  

Market comparable  
Price-based  
2   Discounted cash flows  
  
  
  

  
  
  

   Discounted cash flows  
Option pricing model  
  
  
1,216  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  

  
103  
–  

  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  

  

Total  

  

$ 4,553   $ 2,347  

Significant  
unobservable  

inputs (3)     

Low  

High  

Prices     $

1.00   $ 111.90   $

Credit spread     

1.67%   10.73%  
Credit enhancement      11.70%   15.60%  
     
  

  

     
Yields     

  

  
7.85%   10.72%  

EV/EBITDA multiples     
P/E multiples     
EV/Rev multiples     

14.31X  
24.04X  
5.77X  
Liquidity discounts (4)      10.00%   40.00%  
Discount rate      10.80%   10.80%  
n.a.  

3.97X  
8.47X  
0.35X  

NAV / prices (5)     

n.a.  

1.88%  
1.98%  

Interest rates     
CPI swap rates     

4.49%  
2.59%  
IR-IR correlations      19.00%   67.00%  
FX-IR correlations      29.00%   56.00%  
FX-FX correlations      68.00%   68.00%  

     
     
     
     
     

     
     
     

     

  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  

  

  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  

  

Weighted  
average /  
Inputs  
distribution  

85.64  
6.20%  
13.00%  
  

  
8.92%  

8.59X  
12.46X  
3.88X  
17.35%  
10.80%  
n.a.  

High  
Even  
Even  
Even  
Even  

Lower  
Middle  
Middle  
Upper  

  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  

  

   Discounted cash flows  
  
241  
655  

8.28%  
Option pricing model   Equity (EQ)-EQ correlations      33.00%   94.90%  
EQ-FX correlations     (83.15)%   38.44%  
7.00%   129.00%  

Dividend yields      (0.63)%  

EQ volatilities     

  
  

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

163 

Note 3 Fair value of financial instruments (continued)  

As at October 31, 2021 (Millions of Canadian dollars, except for prices, percentages and ratios)  

  

  

Fair value  

  

  

Range of input values (1), (2)  

Assets   Liabilities  

Valuation  
techniques  

Significant  
unobservable  
inputs (3)  

  

Low  

High  

Weighted  
average /  
Inputs  
distribution  

Products  

Corporate debt and related  

derivatives  

Reporting line in the fair value  
hierarchy table  

  
Corporate debt and other debt  
Loans  
Derivative related liabilities  

$

  
27  
1,077  

   $

Government debt and  
municipal bonds  

  

Corporate debt and other debt  

  
  

  
  

  
  

Private equities, hedge fund  
investments and related  
equity derivatives  

Interest rate derivatives and  

interest-rate-linked  
structured notes (6), (7)  

Equity derivatives and equity-

linked structured  
notes (6), (7)  

Other (8)  
  
  
  
  
  

  
Equities  
Derivative related liabilities  
  
  
  

  
Derivative related assets  
Derivative related liabilities  
  
  

Derivative related assets  
Deposits  
Derivative related liabilities  

  
Asset-backed securities  
Derivative related assets  
Other assets  
Mortgage-backed securities  
U.S. state, municipal and  

agencies debt  

Derivative related liabilities  
Other liabilities  

  
150  

  
1,864  
  
  
  
  

  
367  
  
  
  

  
25  
  
  

  
2  
37  
–  
20  

25  
  
  

151  
381  

  
  
  
  
  

  
24  
7  

  
Price-based  
   Discounted cash flows  
  
  
  
9  

  
  
   Discounted cash flows  

   Market comparable  
Price-based  
  
2   Discounted cash flows  
  
  
  

  
  
  

   Discounted cash flows  
   Option pricing model  
  
  
  

974  
  
  

Credit spread     

Prices     $ 29.18   $ 127.09   $
1.15%  
Credit enhancement      11.92%  
  

6.92%  
15.90%  
  

     

     
Yields     

  
3.91%  

  
8.17%  

EV/EBITDA multiples     
P/E multiples     
EV/Rev multiples     

8.82X  
9.40X  
1.14X  
Liquidity discounts (4)      10.00%  
Discount rate      10.65%  
n.a.  

NAV / prices (5)     

Interest rates     
CPI swap rates     

0.13%  
1.76%  
IR-IR correlations      19.00%  
FX-IR correlations      29.00%  
FX-FX correlations      68.00%  

26.00X  
38.00X  
20.80X  
40.00%  
10.65%  
n.a.  

2.46%  
2.42%  
67.00%  
56.00%  
68.00%  

  

0.00%  
   Discounted cash flows  
   Option pricing model   Equity (EQ)-EQ correlations      32.00%  
EQ-FX correlations     (60.60)%  

Dividend yields     

6.37%  
95.00%  
27.30%  
8.00%   128.00%  

EQ volatilities     

  
  

  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  

  

     
     
     
     
     

     
     
     

     

  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  

  

  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  

  

96.36  
4.04%  
13.25%  
  

  
5.91%  

9.16X  
10.96X  
5.40X  
16.40%  
10.65%  
n.a.  

High  
Even  
Even  
Even  
Even  

Lower  
Middle  
Middle  
Upper  

  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  

  

Total  

  

$ 3,594   $ 1,548  

(1) 

The low and high input values represent the actual highest and lowest level inputs used to value a group of financial instruments in a particular product category. These 
input ranges do not reflect the level of input uncertainty, but are affected by the different underlying instruments within the product category. The input ranges will 
therefore vary from period to period based on the characteristics of the underlying instruments held at each balance sheet date. Where provided, the weighted average 
of the input values is calculated based on the relative fair values of the instruments within the product category. The weighted averages for derivatives are not presented 
in the table as they would not provide a comparable metric; instead, distribution of significant unobservable inputs within the range for each product category is 
indicated in the table. 
Price-based inputs are significant for certain debt securities and are based on external benchmarks, comparable proxy instruments or pre-quarter-end trade data. For 
these instruments, the price input is expressed in dollars for each $100 par value. For example, with an input price of $105, an instrument is valued at a premium over its 
par value. 
The significant unobservable inputs include the following: (i) Enterprise Value (EV); (ii) Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (EBITDA); 
(iii) Price / Earnings (P/E); (iv) Revenue (Rev); (v) Consumer Price Index (CPI); (vi) Interest Rate (IR); (vii) Foreign Exchange (FX); and (viii) Equity (EQ). 
Fair value of securities with liquidity discount inputs totalled $373 million (October 31, 2021 – $385 million). 

(4) 
(5)  NAV of a hedge fund is total fair value of assets less liabilities divided by the number of fund units. Private equities are valued based on NAV or valuation techniques. The 

(3) 

(2) 

(6) 

range for NAV per unit or price per share has not been disclosed for the hedge funds or private equities due to the dispersion of prices given the diverse nature of the 
investments. 
The level of aggregation and diversity within each derivative instrument category may result in certain ranges of inputs being wide and inputs being unevenly distributed 
across the range. In the table, we indicated whether the majority of the inputs are concentrated toward the upper, middle, or lower end of the range, or evenly distributed 
throughout the range. 
The structured notes contain embedded equity or interest rate derivatives with unobservable inputs that are similar to those of the equity or interest rate derivatives. 

(7) 
(8)  Other primarily includes certain insignificant instruments such as auction rate securities, commodity derivatives, foreign exchange derivatives, contingent 

considerations, bank-owned life insurance and retractable shares. 

n.a.  not applicable 

Sensitivity to unobservable inputs and interrelationships between unobservable inputs 
Yield, credit spreads/discount margins 
A financial instrument’s yield is the interest rate used to discount future cash flows in a valuation model. An increase in the yield, 
in isolation, would result in a decrease in a fair value measurement and vice versa. A credit spread/discount margin is the 
difference between a debt instrument’s yield and a benchmark instrument’s yield. Benchmark instruments have high credit 
quality ratings, similar maturities and are often government bonds. The credit spread/discount margin therefore represents the 
discount rate used to determine the present value of future cash flows of an asset to reflect the market return required for 
uncertainty in the estimated cash flows. The credit spread/discount margin for an instrument forms part of the yield used in a 
discounted cash flow method. 

Funding spread 
Funding spreads are credit spreads specific to funding or deposit rates. A decrease in funding spreads, on its own, will increase 
the fair value of our liabilities, and vice versa. 

Default rates 
A default rate is the rate at which borrowers fail to make scheduled loan payments. A decrease in the default rate will typically 
increase the fair value of the loan, and vice versa. This effect will be significantly more pronounced for a non-government 
guaranteed loan than a government guaranteed loan. 

164

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Prepayment rates 
A prepayment rate is the rate at which a loan will be repaid in advance of its expected amortization schedule. Prepayments 
change the future cash flows of a loan. An increase in the prepayment rate in isolation will result in an increase in fair value when 
the loan interest rate is lower than the current reinvestment rate, and a decrease in the prepayment rate in isolation will result in 
a decrease in fair value when the loan interest rate is lower than the current reinvestment rate. Prepayment rates are generally 
negatively correlated with interest rates. 

Recovery and loss severity rates 
A recovery rate is an estimation of the amount that can be collected in a loan default scenario. The recovery rate is the recovered 
amount divided by the loan balance due, expressed as a percentage. The inverse concept of recovery is loss severity. Loss 
severity rate is an estimation of the loan amount not collected when a loan defaults. The loss severity rate is the loss amount 
divided by the loan balance due, expressed as a percentage. Generally, an increase in the recovery rate or a decrease in the loss 
severity rate will increase the loan fair value, and vice versa. 

Volatility rates 
Volatility measures the potential variability of future prices and is often measured as the standard deviation of price movements. 
Volatility is an input to option pricing models used to value derivatives and issued structured notes. Volatility is used in valuing 
equity, interest rate, commodity and foreign exchange options. A higher volatility rate means that the underlying price or rate 
movements are more likely to occur. Higher volatility rates may increase or decrease an option’s fair value depending on the 
option’s terms. The determination of volatility rates is dependent on various factors, including but not limited to, the underlying’s 
market price, the strike price and maturity. 

Dividend yields 
A dividend yield is the underlying equity’s expected dividends expressed as an annual percentage of its price. Dividend yield is 
used as an input for forward equity price and option models. Higher dividend yields will decrease the forward price, and vice 
versa. A higher dividend yield will increase or decrease an option’s value, depending on the option’s terms. 

Correlation rates 
Correlation is the linear relationship between the movements in two different variables. Correlation is an input to the valuation of 
derivative contracts and issued structured notes when an instrument’s payout is determined by correlated variables. When 
variables are positively correlated, an increase in one variable will result in an increase in the other variable. When variables are 
negatively correlated, an increase in one variable will result in a decrease in the other variable. The referenced variables can be 
within a single asset class or market (equity, interest rate, commodities, credit and foreign exchange) or between variables in 
different asset classes (equity to foreign exchange, or interest rate to foreign exchange). Changes in correlation will either 
increase or decrease a financial instrument’s fair value depending on the terms of the instrument. 

Interest rates 
An interest rate is the percentage amount charged on a principal or notional amount. Increasing interest rates will decrease the 
discounted cash flow value of a financial instrument, and vice versa. 

Consumer Price Index swap rates 
A CPI swap rate is expressed as a percentage of an increase in the average price of a basket of consumer goods and services, 
such as transportation, food and medical care. An increase in the CPI swap rate will cause inflation swap payments to be larger, 
and vice versa. 

EV/EBITDA multiples, P/E multiples, EV/Rev multiples, and liquidity discounts 
Private equity valuation inputs include EV/EBITDA multiples, P/E multiples and EV/Rev multiples. These are used to calculate 
either enterprise value or share value of a company based on a multiple of earnings or revenue estimates. Higher multiples 
equate to higher fair values for all multiple types, and vice versa. A liquidity discount may be applied when few or no transactions 
exist to support the valuations. 

Credit Enhancement 
Credit enhancement is an input to the valuation of securitized transactions and is the amount of loan loss protection for a senior 
tranche. Credit enhancement is expressed as a percentage of the transaction sizes. An increase in credit enhancement will cause 
the credit spread to decrease and the tranche fair value to increase, and vice versa. 

Interrelationships between unobservable inputs 
Unobservable inputs, including the above discount margin, default rate, prepayment rate, and recovery and loss severity rates, 
may not be independent of each other. For example, the discount margin can be affected by a change in default rate, prepayment 
rate, or recovery and loss severity rates. Discount margins will generally decrease when default rates decline or when recovery 
rates increase. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

165 

Note 3 Fair value of financial instruments (continued)  

Changes in fair value measurement for instruments measured on a recurring basis and categorized in Level 3 

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Assets  
Securities  
Trading  

Debt issued or guaranteed by:  

U.S. state, municipal and agencies  

Asset-backed securities  
Non-CDO securities  

Corporate debt and other debt  
Equities  

Investment  

Mortgage-backed securities  
Corporate debt and other debt  
Equities  

Loans  

Other  
Net derivative balances (3)  
Interest rate contracts  
Foreign exchange contracts  
Other contracts  
Valuation adjustments  

Other assets  

Liabilities  
Deposits  
Other  

Other liabilities  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Assets  
Securities  
Trading  

Debt issued or guaranteed by:  

U.S. state, municipal and agencies  

Asset-backed securities  
Non-CDO securities  

Corporate debt and other debt  
Equities  

Investment  

Mortgage-backed securities  
Corporate debt and other debt  
Equities  

Loans  
Other  

Net derivative balances (3)  
Interest rate contracts  
Foreign exchange contracts  
Other contracts  
Valuation adjustments  

Other assets  

Liabilities  
Deposits  
Other  

Other liabilities  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

For the year ended October 31, 2022  

Fair value  
at beginning  
of period  
  
  
  
  
25   $
  
2  
25  
1,530  

Gains  
(losses)  
included in  
earnings  
  
  
  
  
–   $
  
–  
(3)  
14  

Gains  
(losses)  
included  
in OCI (1)  
  
  
  
  
2   $
  
–  
–  
100  

$

Purchases  
(issuances)  
  
  
  
  
–   $
  
–  
–  
314  

Settlement  
(sales) and  
other (2)  
  
  
  
  
(23)  $
  
–  
(6)  
(82)  

Transfers  
into  
Level 3  
  
  
  
  
–   $
  
–  
9  
1  

Transfers  
out of  
Level 3  
  
  
  
  
–   $
  
–  
(18)  

Fair value  
at end of  
period  
  
  
  
  
4  
  
2  
7  
(3)   1,874  

Gains  
(losses) included  
in earnings for  
positions still held  
  
  
  
  
–  
  
–  
–  
43  

$

1,582  

11  

102  

314  

(111)  

(21)   1,887  

  
20  
152  
334  

506  

1,077  
  
  
(635)  
47  
(393)  
20  
–  

  
–  
–  
–  

–  

(25)  
  
  
(187)  
(103)  
165  
–  
–  

  
8  
2  
51  

61  

(37)  
  
  
(5)  
(2)  
(34)  
–  
1  

  
–  
–  
(1)  

(1)  

(466)  
  
  
64  
3  
70  
(11)  
(1)  

10  

  
–  
–  
37  

37  

802  
  
  
(13)  
5  
(406)  
19  
–  

  
–  
–  
11  

11  

407  
  
  
17  
(22)  
(245)  
25  
15  

  

  
–  

  
–  
(3)  
(35)  

(38)  

  
28  
151  
397  

576  

(66)   1,692  
  
  
(859)  
(132)  
(785)  
53  
15  

  
  
(100)  
(60)  
58  
–  
–  

  

  
148   $ (241)  
  
–  

  
–  

148   $ (241)  
  

  

$

$

$

  

2,204   $

(139)  $

86   $

522   $

(453)  $

454   $ (227)  $ 2,447  

  

(151)  $

  
(7)  

(158)  $
  

  
2   $
  
(1)  

1   $

  
(3)  $
  
–  

(3)  $

  

  

(120)  $

26   $ (143)  $

  

  
8  

  

  
–  

(120)  $
  

34   $ (143)  $
  

  
For the year ended October 31, 2021  

Fair value  
at beginning  
of period  
  
  
  
  
44   $
  
2  
30  
1,261  

Gains  
(losses)  
included in  
earnings  
  
  
  
  
–   $
  
–  
(2)  
96  

Gains  
(losses)  
included  
in OCI (1)  
  
  
  
  
(2)  $
  
–  
–  
(60)  

$

Purchases  
(issuances)  
  
  
  
  
–   $
  
–  
12  
338  

Settlement  
(sales) and  
other (2)  
  
  
  
  
(17)  $
  
–  
(5)  
(125)  

Transfers  
into  
Level 3  
  
  
  
  
–   $
  
–  
14  
26  

Transfers  
out of  
Level 3  
  
  
  
  
–   $
  
–  
(24)  
(6)  

Fair value  
at end of  
period  
  
  
  
  
25  
  
2  
25  
1,530  

Gains  
(losses) included  
in earnings for  
positions still held  
  
  
  
  
1  
  
–  
(1)  
164  

$

1,337  

94  

350  

(147)  

40  

(30)  

1,582  

  
27  
160  
335  

522  

1,070  
  
  
(588)  
22  
(301)  
40  
53  

  

(139)  $

  
(38)  

(177)  $

(62)  

  
(7)  
(12)  
34  

15  

(19)  
  
  
(1)  
–  
11  
–  
(2)  

  
5   $
  
1  

6   $

  
–  
–  
–  

–  

(5)  
  
  
84  
14  
(20)  
–  
(39)  

  
(66)  $
  
22  

(44)  $

264  
  
  
5  
38  
(142)  
6  
–  

  
–  
–  
5  

5  

  

  
–  

  
–  
4  
(2)  

2  

(8)  
  
  
(109)  
(25)  
102  
(26)  
(12)  

  
–  
–  
–  

–  

73  
  
  
(4)  
7  
(276)  
–  
–  

  
–  
–  
(38)  

(38)  

(298)  
  
  
(22)  
(9)  
233  
–  
–  

  
20  
152  
334  

506  

1,077  
  
  
(635)  
47  
(393)  
20  
–  

2,155   $

128   $

(58)  $

526   $

(223)  $

(160)  $

(164)  $ 2,204  

(191)  $

(154)  $

  
51   $
  
8  

  

  
–  

  
343   $
  
–  

  
(151)  
  
(7)  

(191)  $

59   $

(154)  $

343   $

(158)  

$

$

$

43  

  
n.a.  
n.a.  
n.a.  

n.a.  

(78)  
  
  
(16)  
(90)  
271  
–  
–  

130  

  
19  
  
–  

19  

164  

  
n.a.  
n.a.  
n.a.  

n.a.  

30  
  
  
84  
1  
(10)  
–  
–  

269  

  
6  
  
23  

29  

$

$

$

$

$

$

(1) 

These amounts include the foreign currency translation gains or losses arising on consolidation of foreign subsidiaries relating to the Level 3 instruments, where 
applicable. The unrealized gains on Investment securities recognized in OCI were $50 million for the year ended October 31, 2022 (October 31, 2021 – gains of $46 million) 
excluding the translation gains or losses arising on consolidation. 

(2)  Other includes amortization of premiums or discounts recognized in net income. 
(3)  Net derivatives as at October 31, 2022 included derivative assets of $383 million (October 31, 2021 – $429 million) and derivative liabilities of $2,106 million (October 31, 2021 – 

$1,390 million). 
n.a.  not applicable 

166

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Transfers between fair value hierarchy levels for instruments carried at fair value on a recurring basis 
Transfers between Level 1 and Level 2, and transfers into and out of Level 3 are assumed to occur at the end of the period. For an 
asset or a liability that transfers into Level 3 during the period, the entire change in fair value for the period is excluded from the 
Gains (losses) included in earnings for positions still held column of the above reconciliation, whereas for transfers out of Level 3 
during the period, the entire change in fair value for the period is included in the same column of the above reconciliation. 

Transfers between Level 1 and 2 are dependent on whether fair value is obtained on the basis of quoted market prices in active 
markets (Level 1). 

During the year ended October 31, 2022, there were no significant transfers out of Level 1 to Level 2. During the year ended 

October 31, 2021, transfers out of Level 1 to Level 2 included Obligations related to securities sold short of $498 million. 

During the year ended October 31, 2022, there were no significant transfers out of Level 2 to Level 1. During the year ended 

October 31, 2021, transfers out of Level 2 to Level 1 included Obligations related to securities sold short of $130 million. 

Transfers between Level 2 and Level 3 are primarily due to either a change in the market observability for an input, or a change in 
an unobservable input’s significance to a financial instrument’s fair value. 

During the year ended October 31, 2022, significant transfers out of Level 2 to Level 3 included: 
(cid:129)
(cid:129)

$777 million of Loans, due to changes in the market observability of inputs. 
$227 million of OTC equity options in Other contracts comprised of $57 million of derivative related assets and 
$284 million of derivative related liabilities, due to changes in the market observability of inputs and changes in the 
significance of unobservable inputs. 
$127 million of loan underwriting commitments in derivative related liabilities of Other contracts, due to changes in the 
market observability of inputs. 

(cid:129)

During the year ended October 31, 2021, significant transfers out of Level 2 to Level 3 included: 
(cid:129)

$277 million of OTC equity options in Other contracts comprised of $17 million of derivative related assets and 
$294 million of derivative related liabilities, due to changes in the market observability of inputs and changes in the 
significance of unobservable inputs. 
$154 million of Personal deposits, due to changes in the significance of unobservable inputs. 

(cid:129)

During the year ended October 31, 2022, there were no significant transfers out of Level 3 to Level 2. 
During the year ended October 31, 2021, significant transfers out of Level 3 to Level 2 included: 
(cid:129)
(cid:129)

$298 million of Loans, due to changes in the significance of unobservable inputs. 
$245 million of OTC equity options in Other contracts comprised of $69 million of derivative related assets and 
$314 million of derivative related liabilities, due to changes in the market observability of inputs and changes in the 
significance of unobservable inputs. 
$343 million of Personal deposits, due to changes in the significance of unobservable inputs. 

(cid:129)

Positive and negative fair value movements of Level 3 financial instruments from using reasonably possible alternative 
assumptions 
A financial instrument is classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy if one or more of its unobservable inputs may 
significantly affect the measurement of its fair value. In preparing the financial statements, appropriate levels for these 
unobservable input parameters are chosen so that they are consistent with prevailing market evidence or management 
judgment. Due to the unobservable nature of the prices or rates, there may be uncertainty about the valuation of these Level 3 
financial instruments. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

167 

Note 3 Fair value of financial instruments (continued)  

The following table summarizes the impacts to fair values of Level 3 financial instruments using reasonably possible 

alternative assumptions. This sensitivity disclosure is intended to illustrate the potential impact of the relative uncertainty in the 
fair value of Level 3 financial instruments. In reporting the sensitivities below, we offset balances in instances where: (i) the move 
in valuation factors cause an offsetting positive and negative fair value movement, (ii) both offsetting instruments are in Level 3, 
and (iii) exposures are managed and reported on a net basis. With respect to overall sensitivity, it is unlikely in practice that all 
reasonably possible alternative assumptions would simultaneously be realized. 

  

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Securities  
Trading  

Debt issued or guaranteed by:  
U.S. state, municipal and  

agencies  

Asset-backed securities  
Corporate debt and other debt  
Equities  
Investment  

Mortgage-backed securities  
Corporate debt and other debt  
Equities  

Loans  
Derivatives  
Other assets  

Deposits  
Derivatives  
Other  

Other liabilities  

Level 3  
fair value  

  
  
  

4   $
2  
7  
1,874  
  
28  
151  
397  
1,692  
383  
15  

4,553   $

(241)  $
(2,106)  
  
–  

$

$

$

$

(2,347)  $

October 31, 2022  

Positive fair value  
movement from  
using reasonably  
possible  
alternatives  

As at   

  

Negative fair value  
movement from  
using reasonably  
possible  
alternatives     
     
     
     

October 31, 2021  

Positive fair value  
movement from  
using reasonably  
possible  
alternatives  

Negative fair value  
movement from  
using reasonably  
possible  
alternatives  

  
  
  

–   $
–  
–  
27  
  
4  
12  
38  
60  
5  
–  

146   $

9   $

55  
  
–  

64   $

Level 3  
fair value  

  
  
  

25   $
2  
25  
1,530  
  
20  
152  
334  
1,077  
429  
–  

–      $
–     
–     
(23)    
     
(4)    
(10)    
(39)    
(62)    
(3)    
–     

(141)     $

3,594   $

(9)     $

(57)    
     
–     

(151)  $
(1,390)  
  
(7)  

(66)     $

(1,548)  $

  
  
  

–   $
–  
1  
19  
  
4  
14  
33  
23  
7  
–  

101   $

–   $

30  
  
–  

30   $

  
  
  

(1)  
–  
(1)  
(16)  
  
(4)  
(13)  
(34)  
(24)  
(5)  
–  

(98)  

–  
(77)  
  
–  

(77)  

Sensitivity results 
As at October 31, 2022, the effects of applying other reasonably possible alternative assumptions to the Level 3 asset positions 
would be an increase of $146 million and a reduction of $141 million in fair value, of which $54 million and $53 million would be 
recorded in Other components of equity, respectively. The effects of applying these assumptions to the Level 3 liability positions 
would result in a decrease of $64 million and an increase of $66 million in fair value. 

Level 3 valuation inputs and approaches to developing reasonably possible alternative assumptions 
The following is a summary of the unobservable inputs used in the valuation of the Level 3 instruments and our approaches to 
developing reasonably possible alternative assumptions used to determine sensitivity. 

Financial assets or  
liabilities  
Asset-backed securities,  
corporate debt, government  
debt, municipal bonds and  
loans  
Private equities, hedge fund  
investments and related  
equity derivatives  

Interest rate derivatives  

Equity derivatives  

Bank funding and deposits  

Structured notes  

Sensitivity methodology  

Sensitivities are determined based on adjusting, plus or minus one standard deviation, the  
bid-offer spreads or input prices if a sufficient number of prices is received, adjusting input  
parameters such as credit spreads or using high and low vendor prices as reasonably possible  
alternative assumptions.  
Sensitivity of direct private equity investments is determined by (i) adjusting the discount rate  
by 2% when the discounted cash flow method is used to determine fair value, (ii) adjusting the  
price multiples based on the range of multiples of comparable companies when price-multiples-
based models are used, or (iii) using an alternative valuation approach. The private equity fund,  
hedge fund and related equity derivative NAVs are provided by the fund managers, and as a  
result, there are no other reasonably possible alternative assumptions for these investments.  
Sensitivities of interest rate and cross currency swaps are derived using plus or minus one  
standard deviation of the inputs, and an amount representing model and parameter uncertainty,  
where applicable.  
Sensitivity of the Level 3 position is determined by shifting the unobservable model inputs by  
plus or minus one standard deviation of the pricing service market data including volatility,  
dividends or correlations, as applicable.  
Sensitivities of deposits are calculated by shifting the funding curve by plus or minus certain  
basis points.  
Sensitivities for interest-rate-linked and equity-linked structured notes are derived by adjusting  
inputs by plus or minus one standard deviation, and for other deposits, by estimating a  
reasonable move in the funding curve by plus or minus certain basis points.  

168

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Fair value for financial instruments that are carried at amortized cost and classified using the fair value hierarchy 

As at October 31, 2022  

Fair value may not approximate carrying value  

  

Fair value  
approximates  
carrying value (1)  

Fair value measurements using  

  

Level 1  

Level 2  

Level 3  

Total  

23,543   $

–  

–   $
–  

–   $

70,073  

–   $
–  

–   $

70,073  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Interest-bearing deposits with banks   $
Amortized cost securities (2)  
Assets purchased under reverse  
repurchase agreements and  
securities borrowed  

Loans  

Retail  
Wholesale  

Other assets  

Deposits  

Personal  
Business and government  
Bank  

  

Obligations related to assets sold  

under repurchase agreements and  
securities loaned  

Other liabilities  
Subordinated debentures  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Interest-bearing deposits with banks   $
Amortized cost securities (2)  
Assets purchased under reverse  
repurchase agreements and  
securities borrowed  

Loans  

Retail  
Wholesale  

Other assets  

Deposits  

Personal  
Business and government  
Bank  

Obligations related to assets sold  

under repurchase agreements and  
securities loaned  

Other liabilities  
Subordinated debentures  

  

  

(1) 
(2) 

Total  
fair value  

23,543  
70,073  

53,180  
  
521,428  
253,816  

775,244  

73,084  

995,124  

  
380,396  
605,102  
36,758  

  

Total  
fair value  

22,742  
66,823  

42,892  
  
502,277  
204,683  

706,960  

58,483  

897,900  

  
344,040  
565,106  
24,743  

933,889  

10,956  
  
446,809  
230,880  

677,689  

716  

759,434  

  
108,549  
198,265  
14,120  

320,934  

–  
  
4,457  
4,993  

9,450  

170  

  
433  
792  
–  

10,956  
  
451,266  
235,873  

687,139  

886  

  
108,982  
199,057  
14,120  

9,620  

769,054  

1,225  

322,159  

1,022,256  

–  
1,554  
9,608  

–  
10,805  
60  

–  
12,359  
9,668  

25,112  
90,160  
9,668  

11,524  
  
433,900  
188,455  

622,355  

624  

701,326  

  
71,365  
146,921  
7,800  

226,086  

11,524  
  
429,672  
184,055  

613,727  

489  

691,538  

  
70,908  
146,334  
7,792  

225,034  

–  
1,256  
9,545  

–  
  
4,228  
4,400  

8,628  

135  

8,763  

  
457  
587  
8  

1,052  

–  
7,998  
56  

–  
9,254  
9,601  

26,054  
64,749  
9,601  

42,224  
  
70,162  
17,943  

88,105  

72,198  

226,070  

  
271,414  
406,045  
22,638  

700,097  

25,112  
77,801  
–  

31,368  
  
68,377  
16,228  

84,605  

57,859  

196,574  

  
272,675  
418,185  
16,943  

707,803  

26,054  
55,495  
–  

–  
  
–  
–  

–  

–  

–  

  
–  
–  
–  

–  

–  
–  
–  

–  
  
–  
–  

–  

–  

  
–  
–  
–  

–  

–  
–  
–  

1,025  

  

$

803,010   $
  

  

–   $ 332,096   $ 12,090   $ 344,186   $ 1,147,196  

  

  
As at October 31, 2021  

  

  

Fair value  
approximates  
carrying value (1)  

Fair value may not approximate carrying value  

Fair value measurements using  

  

Level 1  

Level 2  

Level 3  

Total  

22,742   $
–  

–   $

–   $

1,025  

65,798  

–   $
–  

–   $

66,823  

Certain financial instruments have not been assigned to a level as the carrying amount approximates their fair values. 
Included in Securities – Investment, net of applicable allowance on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. 

$

789,352   $

–   $ 235,835   $

9,106   $ 244,941   $ 1,034,293  

Fair values of financial assets and liabilities carried at amortized cost and disclosed in the table above are determined using the 
following valuation techniques and inputs. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

169 

Note 3 Fair value of financial instruments (continued)  

Amortized cost securities 
Fair values of government bonds, corporate bonds, and ABS are based on quoted prices. Fair values of certain Non-OECD 
government bonds are based on vendor prices or the discounted cash flow method with yield curves of other countries’ 
government bonds as inputs. For ABS, where market prices are not available, the fair value is determined using the discounted 
cash flow method. The inputs to the valuation model generally include market interest rates, spreads and yields derived from 
comparable securities, prepayment, and LGD. 

Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowed, and Obligations related to assets sold 
under repurchase agreements and securities loaned 
Valuation methods used for the long-term instruments are described in the Fair value of assets and liabilities measured on a 
recurring basis and classified using the fair value hierarchy section of this note. The carrying values of short-term instruments 
generally approximate their fair values. 

Loans – Retail 
Retail loans include residential mortgages, personal and small business loans and credit cards. For residential mortgages, and 
personal and small business loans, we segregate the portfolio based on certain attributes such as product type, contractual 
interest rate, term to maturity and credit scores, if applicable. Fair values of these loans are determined by the discounted cash 
flow method using applicable inputs such as prevailing interest rates, contractual and posted client rates, client discounts, credit 
spreads, prepayment rates and loan-to-value (LTV) ratios. Fair values of credit card receivables are also calculated based on a 
discounted cash flow method with portfolio yields, write-offs and monthly payment rates as inputs. The carrying values of short-
term and variable rate loans generally approximate their fair values. 

Loans – Wholesale 
Where market prices are available, wholesale loans are valued based on market prices. Otherwise, fair value is determined by 
the discounted cash flow method using the following inputs: market interest rates and market based spreads of assets with 
similar credit ratings and terms to maturity, LGD, expected default frequency implied from credit default swap prices, if available, 
and relevant pricing information such as contractual rate, origination and maturity dates, redemption price, coupon payment 
frequency and date convention. 

Deposits 
Deposits are comprised of demand, notice, and term deposits which include senior deposit notes we have issued to provide us 
with long-term funding. Fair values of term deposits are determined by one of several valuation techniques: (i) for term deposits 
and similar instruments, we segregate the portfolio based on term to maturity. Fair values of these instruments are determined 
by the discounted cash flow method using inputs such as client rates for new sales of the corresponding terms; and (ii) for senior 
deposit notes, we use actual traded prices, vendor prices or the discounted cash flow method using a market interest rate curve 
and our funding spreads as inputs. The carrying values of demand, notice, and short-term term deposits generally approximate 
their fair values. 

Other assets and Other liabilities 
Other assets and Other liabilities include receivables and payables relating to certain commodities. Fair values of the commodity 
receivables and payables are calculated by the discounted cash flow method using applicable inputs such as market interest 
rates, counterparties’ credit spreads, our funding spreads, commodity forward prices and spot prices. 

Subordinated debentures 
Fair values of Subordinated debentures are based on market prices, dealer quotes or vendor prices when available. Where prices 
cannot be observed, fair value is determined using the discounted cash flow method, with applicable inputs such as market 
interest rates and credit spreads. 

170

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Note 4 Securities  

Carrying value of securities 

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Trading (2)  

Debt issued or guaranteed by:  

Canadian government  
U.S. federal, state, municipal and  

agencies  

Other OECD government  
Mortgage-backed securities  
Asset-backed securities  
Corporate debt and other debt  

Bankers’ acceptances  
Other (3)  

Equities  
  

Fair value through other  

comprehensive income (2)  
Debt issued or guaranteed by:  

Canadian government  

U.S. federal, state, municipal and  

Provincial and municipal  

Federal  

Amortized cost  
Fair value  
Yield (4)  

Amortized cost  
Fair value  
Yield (4)  

agencies  

Amortized cost  
Fair value  
Yield (4)  

Other OECD government  
Amortized cost  
Fair value  
Yield (4)  

Mortgage-backed securities  
Amortized cost  
Fair value  
Yield (4)  

Asset-backed securities  

Corporate debt and other debt  

Amortized cost  
Fair value  
Yield (4)  

Amortized cost  
Fair value  
Yield (4)  

Cost  
Fair value (5)  

Equities  

Amortized cost  
Fair value  

Amortized cost (2)  

Debt issued or guaranteed by:  

Canadian government  
Yield (4)  
U.S. federal, state, municipal and  

agencies  

Yield (4)  
Other OECD government  
Yield (4)  

Asset-backed securities  
Yield (4)  
Corporate debt and other debt  
Yield (4)  
Amortized cost, net of allowance  
Fair value  

Total carrying value of securities  

As at October 31, 2022  

Term to maturity (1)  

Within  
3 months  
  
  

3 months  
to 1 year  
  
  

1 year to  
5 years  
  
  

5 years to  
10 years  
  
  

Over  
10 years  
  
  

$ 2,255   $ 14,181   $ 6,907   $

2,706   $ 6,011   $

7,151  
1,343  
–  
779  
  
252  
3,055  
  
14,835  

10,107  
233  
–  
49  
  
3  
1,837  
  
26,410  

  
  
  
  
780  
778  
2.3%  
  
237  
237  
2.0%  

  
802  
802  
4.9%  
  
1,105  
1,105  
2.4%  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
5,922  
5,919  
3.2%  
  
  
  
8,846  
8,841  
  
  
929  
2.4%  

  
  
  
  
1,010  
1,009  
2.3%  
  
215  
216  
2.7%  

  
2,613  
2,615  
0.4%  
  
642  
642  
1.2%  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
4,793  
4,792  
2.8%  
  
  
  
9,273  
9,274  
  
  
1,734  
2.8%  

7,043  
606  
–  
67  
  
–  
4,813  
  
19,436  

  
  
  
  
1,024  
1,012  
2.8%  
  
616  
616  
2.0%  

  
13,586  
13,554  
1.9%  
  
3,406  
3,396  
1.7%  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
46  
46  
4.6%  
  
12,420  
12,307  
2.6%  
  
  
  
31,098  
30,931  
  
  
16,655  
2.0%  

4,507  
241  
–  
207  
  
–  
3,037  
  
10,698  

  
  
  
  
745  
635  
1.6%  
  
56  
56  
3.8%  

  
9,104  
9,061  
3.4%  
  
1  
1  
4.4%  
  
41  
37  
4.5%  
  
6,331  
6,172  
5.3%  
  
2,666  
2,656  
3.1%  
  
  
  
18,944  
18,618  
  
  
6,101  
2.3%  

8,020  
2,354  
2  
208  
  
–  
8,172  
  
24,767  

  
  
  
  
522  
347  
3.1%  
  
1,561  
999  
4.1%  

  
19,929  
18,326  
3.0%  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
2,944  
2,851  
4.7%  
  
1,911  
1,830  
5.4%  
  
51  
46  
5.1%  
  
  
  
26,918  
24,399  
  
  
–  
–  

  

  

With no  
specific  
maturity  
  
  

Total  
  
  
–   $ 32,060  

–  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
52,059  
52,059  

36,828  
4,777  
2  
1,310  
  
255  
20,914  
52,059  
148,205  

  
  
  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
–  

  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
551  
828  
551  
828  
  
  
–  
–  

  
  
  
  
4,081  
3,781  
2.4%  
  
2,685  
2,124  
3.0%  

  
46,034  
44,358  
2.6%  
  
5,154  
5,144  
1.8%  
  
2,985  
2,888  
4.7%  
  
8,288  
8,048  
5.3%  
  
25,852  
25,720  
2.8%  
  
551  
828  
95,630  
92,891  
  
  
25,419  
2.1%  

161  
4.4%  
235  
1.3%  
–  
–  
574  
0.8%  
1,899  
1,899  

34,132  
2.3%  
5,518  
1.7%  
711  
3.1%  
11,347  
2.0%  
77,127  
70,073  
$ 25,575   $ 42,210   $ 82,699   $ 40,141   $ 74,711   $ 52,887   $ 318,223  

25,518  
2.4%  
–  
–  
3  
1.5%  
24  
4.9%  
25,545  
21,707  

3,784  
2.3%  
64  
1.3%  
135  
3.5%  
741  
2.4%  
10,825  
9,433  

3,885  
1.7%  
3,645  
1.9%  
573  
3.0%  
7,574  
2.6%  
32,332  
30,579  

784  
3.0%  
1,574  
1.3%  
–  
–  
2,434  
1.7%  
6,526  
6,455  

–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

171 

Note 4 Securities (continued)  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Trading (2)  

Debt issued or guaranteed by:  

Canadian government  
U.S. federal, state, municipal and  

agencies  

Other OECD government  
Mortgage-backed securities  
Asset-backed securities  
Corporate debt and other debt  

Bankers’ acceptances  
Other (3)  

Equities  
  

Fair value through other comprehensive  

income (2)  
Debt issued or guaranteed by:  

Canadian government  

U.S. federal, state, municipal and  

Provincial and municipal  

Federal  

Amortized cost  
Fair value  
Yield (4)  

Amortized cost  
Fair value  
Yield (4)  

agencies  

Amortized cost  
Fair value  
Yield (4)  

Other OECD government  
Amortized cost  
Fair value  
Yield (4)  

Mortgage-backed securities  
Amortized cost  
Fair value  
Yield (4)  

Asset-backed securities  

Corporate debt and other debt  

Amortized cost  
Fair value  
Yield (4)  

Amortized cost  
Fair value  
Yield (4)  

Cost  
Fair value (5)  

Equities  

Amortized cost  
Fair value  

Amortized cost (2)  

Debt issued or guaranteed by:  

Canadian government  
Yield (4)  
U.S. federal, state, municipal and  

agencies  

Yield (4)  
Other OECD government  
Yield (4)  

Asset-backed securities  
Yield (4)  
Corporate debt and other debt  
Yield (4)  
Amortized cost, net of allowance  
Fair value  

Total carrying value of securities  

As at October 31, 2021  

Term to maturity (1)  

Within  
3 months  
  
  
1,244   $

$

3 months  
to 1 year  
  
  

1 year to  
5 years  
  
  

5 years to  
10 years  
  
  

Over  
10 years  
  
  

4,252   $ 6,187   $

3,339   $ 7,403   $

2,381  
2,049  
–  
288  
  
316  
2,317  
  
8,595  

  
  
  
  
161  
161  
0.4%  
  
3  
3  
4.2%  

  
1,131  
1,132  
–  
  
176  
176  
1.7%  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
5,965  
5,965  
0.9%  
  
  
  
7,436  
7,437  
  
  
453  
1.1%  

1,616  
2,073  
–  
27  
  
135  
2,526  
  
10,629  

  
  
  
  
1,180  
1,178  
0.7%  
  
283  
283  
2.6%  

  
5,010  
5,013  
0.9%  
  
1,274  
1,274  
1.0%  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
2,597  
2,599  
1.2%  
  
  
  
10,344  
10,347  
  
  
2,979  
1.5%  

6,203  
1,231  
–  
275  
  
–  
5,433  
  
19,329  

  
  
  
  
1,382  
1,375  
1.8%  
  
1,326  
1,322  
2.4%  

  
7,960  
7,960  
0.4%  
  
4,498  
4,505  
1.3%  
  
56  
56  
1.2%  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
9,676  
9,699  
1.5%  
  
  
  
24,898  
24,917  
  
  
17,589  
1.5%  

4,092  
294  
–  
116  
  
–  
3,716  
  
11,557  

  
  
  
  
592  
544  
0.9%  
  
158  
158  
1.7%  

  
2,380  
2,446  
2.6%  
  
1  
1  
3.9%  
  
55  
55  
1.3%  
  
4,719  
4,719  
1.2%  
  
1,451  
1,463  
0.8%  
  
  
  
9,356  
9,386  
  
  
3,601  
2.0%  

8,686  
2,812  
4  
187  
  
–  
8,667  
  
27,759  

  
  
  
  
526  
445  
2.4%  
  
1,558  
1,366  
2.9%  

  
18,197  
18,276  
1.3%  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
2,646  
2,636  
1.2%  
  
2,935  
2,941  
1.3%  
  
42  
51  
3.6%  
  
  
  
25,904  
25,715  
  
  
194  
1.7%  

  

  

With no  
specific  
maturity  
  
  

Total  
  
  
–   $ 22,425  

–  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
61,371  
61,371  

22,978  
8,459  
4  
893  
  
451  
22,659  
61,371  
139,240  

  
  
  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
–  

  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
–  
  
242  
533  
242  
533  
  
  
–  
–  

  
  
  
  
3,841  
3,703  
1.3%  
  
3,328  
3,132  
2.6%  

  
34,678  
34,827  
1.1%  
  
5,949  
5,956  
1.2%  
  
2,757  
2,747  
1.2%  
  
7,654  
7,660  
1.3%  
  
19,731  
19,777  
1.2%  
  
242  
533  
78,180  
78,335  
  
  
24,816  
1.5%  

1,093  
–  
1,914  
–  
–  
–  
1,133  
1.0%  
4,593  
4,597  

27,411  
1.3%  
5,974  
–  
663  
1.1%  
8,285  
1.4%  
67,149  
66,823  
$ 20,625   $ 27,513   $ 73,087   $ 28,338   $73,257   $ 61,904   $284,724  

19,559  
1.3%  
–  
–  
7  
1.4%  
23  
4.7%  
19,783  
19,647  

3,718  
1.0%  
2,790  
0.8%  
320  
0.5%  
4,424  
1.6%  
28,841  
28,701  

274  
1.0%  
1,212  
1.3%  
–  
–  
2,072  
1.2%  
6,537  
6,567  

2,767  
2.1%  
58  
1.1%  
336  
1.7%  
633  
2.0%  
7,395  
7,311  

–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  

(1) 
(2) 

Actual maturities may differ from contractual maturities shown above as borrowers may have the right to extend or prepay obligations with or without penalties. 
Trading securities and FVOCI securities are recorded at fair value. Amortized cost securities, included in Investment securities, are recorded at amortized cost and 
presented net of allowance for credit losses. 
Primarily composed of corporate debt, supra-national debt, and commercial paper. 
The weighted average yield is derived using the contractual interest rate and the carrying value at the end of the year for the respective securities. 

(3) 
(4) 
(5)  Certain equity securities that are not held-for-trading purposes are designated as FVOCI. 

172

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Unrealized gains and losses on securities at FVOCI (1), (2) 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Debt issued or guaranteed by:  

Canadian government  

Federal (3)  
Provincial and municipal  
U.S. federal, state, municipal  

and agencies (3)  

Other OECD government  
Mortgage-backed securities (3)  
Asset-backed securities  

CDO  
Non-CDO securities  

Corporate debt and other debt  
Equities  

October 31, 2022  

October 31, 2021  

As at

  

  

Cost/  
Amortized  
cost  

Gross  
unrealized  
gains  

Gross  
unrealized  
losses  

Fair  
value    

Cost/  
Amortized  
cost  

Gross  
unrealized  
gains  

Gross  
unrealized  
losses  

Fair  
value  

  
  

$

4,081   $
2,685  

  
  
1   $
6  

  
  

    
    

  
  

(301)  $ 3,781     $
(567)  

2,124    

3,841   $
3,328  

  
  
1   $
3  

  
  

  
  
(139)  $ 3,703  
3,132  
(199)  

46,034  
5,154  
2,985  
  
7,741  
547  
25,852  
551  

343  
7  
1  
  
3  
–  
51  
284  

(17)  
(98)  
  
(220)  
(23)  

(2,019)   44,358    
5,144    
2,888    
    
7,524    
524    
(183)   25,720    
828    

(7)  

34,678  
5,949  
2,757  
  
7,074  
580  
19,731  
242  

353  
8  
2  
  
1  
6  
57  
292  

(1)  
(12)  
  
(1)  
–  

(204)   34,827  
5,956  
2,747  
  
7,074  
586  
(11)   19,777  
533  

(1)  

$ 95,630   $

696   $

(3,435)  $ 92,891     $ 78,180   $

723   $

(568)  $ 78,335  

Excludes $77,127 million of held-to-collect securities as at October 31, 2022 that are carried at amortized cost, net of allowance for credit losses (October 31, 2021 – 
$67,149 million). 

(2)  Gross unrealized gains and losses includes $(19) million of allowance for credit losses on debt securities at FVOCI as at October 31, 2022 (October 31, 2021 – $(9) million) 

recognized in income and Other components of equity. 
The majority of the MBS are residential. Cost/Amortized cost, Gross unrealized gains, Gross unrealized losses and Fair value related to commercial MBS are 
$2,846 million, $1 million, $92 million and $2,755 million, respectively as at October 31, 2022 (October 31, 2021 – $2,603 million, $1 million, $12 million and $2,592 million, 
respectively). 

Allowance for credit losses on investment securities 
The following tables reconcile the opening and closing allowance for debt securities at FVOCI and amortized cost by stage. 
Reconciling items include the following: 
(cid:129) Model changes, which generally comprise the impact of significant changes to the quantitative models used to estimate 

expected credit losses and any staging impacts that may arise. 
Transfers between stages, which are presumed to occur before any corresponding remeasurement of the allowance. 
Purchases, which reflect the allowance related to assets newly recognized during the period, including those assets that 
were derecognized following a modification of terms. 
Sales and maturities, which reflect the allowance related to assets derecognized during the period without a credit loss 
being incurred, including those assets that were derecognized following a modification of terms. 
Changes in risk, parameters and exposures, which comprise the impact of changes in model inputs or assumptions, including 
changes in forward-looking macroeconomic conditions; partial repayments; changes in the measurement following a 
transfer between stages; and unwinding of the time value discount due to the passage of time. 

Allowance for credit losses – securities at FVOCI (1) 

  

(1) 

(3) 

  

  

(cid:129)
(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Balance at beginning of period  
Provision for credit losses  

Model changes  
Transfers to stage 1  
Transfers to stage 2  
Transfers to stage 3  
Purchases  
Sales and maturities  
Changes in risk, parameters and exposures  

Exchange rate and other  

Balance at end of period  

October 31, 2022  

October 31, 2021  

Performing  

  

Impaired  

  

Performing  

  

Impaired  

  

For the year ended  

  

  

Stage 1  

Stage 2      Stage 3 (2)  

Total     

Stage 1  

Stage 2     

Stage 3 (2)  

Total  

$

2   $

1      $

  
–  
1  
–  
–  
3  
(1)  
(2)  
–  

     
–     
(1)    
–     
–     
–     
–     
1     
–     

(12)   $ (9)     $ 12   $
     
–     
–     
–     
–     
3     
(1)    
(11)    
(1)    

  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
(10)  
(1)  

  
(4)  
1  
–  
–  
8  
(10)  
(4)  
(1)  

–     $
    
–    
(1)    
–    
–    
–    
(1)    
3    
–    

(4)   $ 8  
  
(4)  
–  
–  
–  
8  
(11)  
(10)  
–  

  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
(9)  
1  

$

3   $

1      $

(23)   $ (19)     $

2   $

1     $

(12)   $ (9)  

(1) 

Expected credit losses on debt securities at FVOCI are not separately recognized on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as the related securities are recorded at fair value. 
The cumulative amount of credit losses recognized in income is presented in Other components of equity. 

(2)  Reflects changes in the allowance for purchased credit impaired securities. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

173 

Note 4 Securities (continued)  

Allowance for credit losses – securities at amortized cost 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Balance at beginning of period  
Provision for credit losses  

Model changes  
Transfers to stage 1  
Transfers to stage 2  
Transfers to stage 3  
Purchases  
Sales and maturities  
Changes in risk, parameters and exposures  

Exchange rate and other  

Balance at end of period  

For the year ended  

October 31, 2022  

October 31, 2021  

Performing  

  

Impaired  

  

Performing  

  

Impaired  

  

Stage 1  

Stage 2     

Stage 3  

Total  

Stage 1  

Stage 2     

Stage 3  

Total  

$

5   $ 18     $

–   $ 23      $ 10   $ 19      $

  

  

  

     
–     
–     
–     
–     
11     
(1)    
(13)    
2     

  
–  
–  
–  
–  
11  
(1)  
(7)  
–  

    
–    
–    
–    
–    
–    
–    
(6)    
2    

  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  

  
(4)  
–  
–  
–  
9  
(1)  
(9)  
–  

     
–     
–     
–     
–     
–     
–     
1     
(2)    

–   $ 29  
  
(4)  
–  
–  
–  
9  
(1)  
(8)  
(2)  

  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  

$

8   $ 14     $

–   $ 22      $

5   $ 18      $

–   $ 23  

Credit risk exposure by internal risk rating 
The following table presents the fair value of debt securities at FVOCI and gross carrying amount of securities at amortized cost. 
Risk ratings are based on internal ratings used in the measurement of expected credit losses, as at the reporting date, as outlined 
in the internal ratings maps in the Credit risk section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis. 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Investment securities  
Securities at FVOCI  
Investment grade  
Non-investment grade  
Impaired  

October 31, 2022  

October 31, 2021  

Performing  

  

Impaired  

  

Performing  

  

Impaired  

  

Stage 1  

Stage 2     

Stage 3 (1)  

Total     

Stage 1  

Stage 2     

Stage 3 (1)  

Total  

As at   

  

  

     
     

  
  

$ 91,177   $ 56     $

–   $ 91,233      $ 77,147   $ 82      $
–  
150  

680     
150     

423  
–  

–     
–     

680  
–  

91,857  
  

  
  

  

  

    
    

–    
–    

56    
    

    

Items not subject to impairment (2)  

  

Securities at amortized cost  
Investment grade  
Non-investment grade  
Impaired  

  
Allowance for credit losses  

150  
  

92,063     
828     

77,570  
  

   $ 92,891     

$ 76,035   $

898  
–  

76,933  
8  

    
–     $

216    
–    

216    
14    

  

     
–   $ 76,035      $ 66,033   $
–  
–  

1,114     
–     

928  
–  

  

–  
–  

77,149     
22     

66,961  
5  

  
  

  

     
     

82     
     

     

     
–      $

211     
–     

211     
18     

  
  

  
  
–   $ 77,229  
423  
–  
150  
150  

150  
  

77,802  
533  

   $ 78,335  

  

  
–   $ 66,033  
1,139  
–  
–  
–  

–  
–  

67,172  
23  

Amortized cost  

$ 76,925   $ 202     $

–   $ 77,127      $ 66,956   $ 193      $

–   $ 67,149  

(1) 
(2) 

Reflects $150 million of purchased credit impaired securities (October 31, 2021 – $150 million). 
Investment securities at FVOCI not subject to impairment represent equity securities designated as FVOCI. 

174

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Note 5 Loans and allowance for credit losses  

Loans by geography and portfolio net of allowance 

Undrawn loan commitments – Retail  
Undrawn loan commitments – Wholesale  

258,115  
118,928  

4,630  
225,113  

2,212   264,957  
81,194   425,235  

  

  
  

  

  

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Retail (2)  

Residential mortgages  
Personal  
Credit cards (3)  
Small business (4)  

Wholesale (2), (5)  

Total loans  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Retail (2)  

Residential mortgages  
Personal  
Credit cards (3)  
Small business (4)  

Wholesale (2), (5)  

Total loans   

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Retail   
Wholesale   

Total loans  
Allowance for loan losses  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Retail  
Wholesale  

Total loans  
Allowance for loan losses  

Undrawn loan commitments – Retail  
Undrawn loan commitments – Wholesale  

240,242  
107,070  

3,713  
189,177  

1,989  
75,331  

245,944  
371,578  

(136)  
(105)  

Excludes allowance for loans measured at FVOCI of $5 million (October 31, 2021 – $14 million). 

(1) 
(2)  Geographic information is based on residence of the borrower. 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 

The credit cards business is managed as a single portfolio and includes both consumer and business cards. 
Includes small business exposure managed on a pooled basis. 
Includes small business exposure managed on an individual client basis. 

Loans maturity and rate sensitivity 

Total loans net of allowance for loan losses  

  

  

   $ 819,965  

  

  

   $ 819,965  

Canada  

United  
States  

Other  
International  

Allowance for  
loan losses (1)  

Total net  
of allowance  

  

  

$ 383,797   $ 31,956   $

79,422  
19,778  
12,669  
108,916  

14,888  
558  
–  
114,795  

As at October 31, 2022  

Total  

  

3,043   $418,796   $
3,399  
241  
–  

97,709  
20,577  
12,669  
50,256   273,967  

$ 604,582   $ 162,197   $

56,939   $823,718   $

(3,753)   $

819,965  

  
(432)   $
(856)  
(849)  
(181)  
(1,435)  

  
418,364  
96,853  
19,728  
12,488  
272,532  

(243)  
(135)  

  

  

  

  

  

As at October 31, 2021  

  

  

Canada  

United  
States  

Other  
International  

Total  

Allowance for  
loan losses (1)  

Total net  
of allowance  

$ 354,169   $
78,232  
17,235  
12,003  
88,083  

23,423   $
11,794  
384  
–  
86,028  

2,740   $ 380,332   $
3,415  
203  
–  
43,955  

93,441  
17,822  
12,003  
218,066  

  
(416)   $
(973)  
(852)  
(168)  
(1,680)  

  
379,916  
92,468  
16,970  
11,835  
216,386  

$ 549,722   $ 121,629   $

50,313   $ 721,664   $

(4,089)   $

717,575  

  

  

  

  
  

  

  
  

As at October 31, 2022  

Maturity term (1)  

  

Rate sensitivity  

  

Under  
1 year (2)  

1 to 5  
years  

Over 5  
years  

Total  

Floating  

Fixed  
Rate  

Non-rate-  
sensitive  

Total  

$ 277,302   $ 226,793   $ 45,656   $ 549,751   $ 199,414   $ 342,087   $ 8,250   $ 549,751  
2,184   273,967  

46,660   225,123  

35,802   11,352  

273,967  

226,813  

$ 504,115   $ 262,595   $ 57,008   $ 823,718   $ 246,074   $ 567,210   $ 10,434   $ 823,718  
(3,753)  

(3,753)  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

As at October 31, 2021  

Maturity term (1)  

  

Rate sensitivity  

  

Under  
1 year (2)  

1 to 5  
years  

Over 5  
years  

Total  

Floating  

Fixed  
Rate  

Non-rate-  
sensitive  

Total  

$ 249,363   $ 222,408   $ 31,827   $ 503,598   $ 166,910   $ 329,185   $

174,345  

33,882  

9,839  

218,066  

36,143  

179,588  

$ 423,708   $ 256,290   $ 41,666   $ 721,664   $ 203,053   $ 508,773   $

  

  

  

  

  

(4,089)  

   $ 717,575  

  

  

  

  

7,503   $ 503,598  
218,066  
2,335  

9,838   $ 721,664  
(4,089)  

  

   $ 717,575  

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

175 

Total loans net of allowance for loan losses  

(1)  Generally, based on the earlier of contractual repricing or maturity date. 
(2) 

Includes variable rate loans that can be repriced at the clients’ discretion without penalty. 

Note 5 Loans and allowance for credit losses (continued)  

Allowance for credit losses 

  

  

  

(cid:129)
(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Retail  

Residential mortgages  
Personal  
Credit cards  
Small business  

Wholesale  
Customers’ liability under  

acceptances  

October 31, 2022  

  

October 31, 2021  

For the year ended  

Balance at  
beginning  
of period  

Provision  
for credit  
losses  

Net  
write-offs (1)  

Exchange  
rate and  
other  

Balance  
at end  
of period     

Balance at  
beginning  
of period  

Provision  
for credit  
losses  

Net  
write-offs (1)  

Exchange  
rate and  
other  

Balance  
at end  
of period  

  

$

416   $

1,079  
875  
177  

1,797  

  
27   $

211  
348  
31  

(90)  

  
(24)  $
(248)  
(332)  
(23)  

(136)  

  

    

13   $ 432     $
1   1,043    
893    
2  
194    
9  

3   1,574    

  
518   $

1,309  
1,246  
140  

2,795  

  
(43)  $
23  
(72)  
12  

  
(27)  $
(247)  
(297)  
(23)  

  

  
(32)  $ 416  
(6)   1,079  
875  
(2)  
177  
48  

(560)  

(200)  

(238)   1,797  

75  

(30)  

–  

–  

45    

107  

(32)  

–  

–  

75  

$ 4,419   $ 497   $

(763)  $

28   $4,181     $ 6,115   $ (672)  $

(794)  $ (230)  $ 4,419  

Presented as:  

Allowance for loan losses  
Other liabilities – Provisions  
Customers’ liability under  

acceptances  

Other components of equity  

  
$ 4,089  
241  

75  
14  

  
  
  

  
  

  
  
  

  
  

  
  
    
   $3,753     $ 5,639  
363  
  

378    

  
  

45    
5    

107  
6  

  
  
  

  
  

  
  
  

  
  

  
  
   $ 4,089  
241  
  

  
  

75  
14  

(1) 

Loans written-off are generally subject to continued collection efforts for a period of time following write-off. The contractual amount outstanding on loans written-off 
during the year ended October 31, 2022 that are no longer subject to enforcement activity was $53 million (October 31, 2021 – $93 million). 

The following table reconciles the opening and closing allowance for each major product of loans and commitments as 
determined by our modelled, scenario-weighted allowance and the application of expert credit judgment as applicable. 
Reconciling items include the following: 
(cid:129) Model changes, which generally comprise the impact of significant changes to the quantitative models used to estimate 

expected credit losses and any staging impacts that may arise. 
Transfers between stages, which are presumed to occur before any corresponding remeasurements of the allowance. 
Originations, which reflect the allowance related to assets newly recognized during the period, including those assets that 
were derecognized following a modification of terms. 

(cid:129) Maturities, which reflect the allowance related to assets derecognized during the period without a credit loss being incurred, 

including those assets that were derecognized following a modification of terms. 
Changes in risk, parameters and exposures, which comprise the impact of changes in model inputs or assumptions, including 
changes in forward-looking macroeconomic conditions; partial repayments and additional draws on existing facilities; 
changes in the measurement following a transfer between stages; and unwinding of the time value discount due to the 
passage of time in Stage 1 and Stage 2. 

176

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

235   $

65      $

132   $

432      $

186   $

92      $

138   $

285   $

661      $

97   $

1,043      $

422   $

569      $

88   $

1,079  

Allowance for credit losses – Retail and wholesale loans 

  

  

  

October 31, 2022  

October 31, 2021  

Performing  

  

Impaired  

  

Performing  

  

Impaired  

  

For the year ended   

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Stage 1  

Stage 2     

Stage 3  

Total     

Stage 1  

Stage 2     

Stage 3  

Total  

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

Residential mortgages  
Balance at beginning of period  
Provision for credit losses  

Model changes  
Transfers to stage 1  
Transfers to stage 2  
Transfers to stage 3  
Originations  
Maturities  
Changes in risk, parameters and  

exposures  

Write-offs  
Recoveries  
Exchange rate and other  

Balance at end of period  

Personal  
Balance at beginning of period  
Provision for credit losses  

Model changes  
Transfers to stage 1  
Transfers to stage 2  
Transfers to stage 3  
Originations  
Maturities  
Changes in risk, parameters and  

exposures  

Write-offs  
Recoveries  
Exchange rate and other  

Balance at end of period  

Credit cards  
Balance at beginning of period  
Provision for credit losses  

Model changes  
Transfers to stage 1  
Transfers to stage 2  
Transfers to stage 3  
Originations  
Maturities  
Changes in risk, parameters and  

exposures  

Write-offs  
Recoveries  
Exchange rate and other  

Balance at end of period  

Small business  
Balance at beginning of period  
Provision for credit losses  

Model changes  
Transfers to stage 1  
Transfers to stage 2  
Transfers to stage 3  
Originations  
Maturities  
Changes in risk, parameters and  

exposures  

Write-offs  
Recoveries  
Exchange rate and other  

Balance at end of period  

Wholesale  
Balance at beginning of period  
Provision for credit losses  

Model changes  
Transfers to stage 1  
Transfers to stage 2  
Transfers to stage 3  
Originations  
Maturities  
Changes in risk, parameters and  

exposures  

Write-offs  
Recoveries  
Exchange rate and other  

  
186   $
  
(21)  
113  
(14)  
(2)  
159  
(23)  

(167)  
–  
–  
4  

  
422   $
  
(3)  
609  
(120)  
(2)  
106  
(70)  

(660)  
–  
–  
3  

  
233   $
  
(2)  
495  
(95)  
(2)  
10  
(5)  

(458)  
–  
–  
1  

  
88   $
  
–  
27  
(17)  
(1)  
32  
(22)  

(43)  
–  
–  
9  

  
566   $
  
(14)  
415  
(78)  
(3)  
641  
(439)  

(504)  
–  
–  
13  

     
92      $
     
10     
(98)    
23     
(25)    
–     
(9)    

68     
–     
–     
4     

     
569      $
     
–     
(607)    
121     
(47)    
–     
(99)    

724     
–     
–     
–     

     
642      $
     
–     
(495)    
95     
(325)    
–     
(29)    

826     
–     
–     
2     

     
55      $
     
–     
(27)    
17     
(4)    
–     
(24)    

50     
–     
–     
6     

     
794      $
     
(3)    
(411)    
80     
(62)    
–     
(345)    

503     
–     
–     
29     

  

  

     
416      $
     
(11)    
–     
–     
–     
159     
(32)    

(89)    
(38)    
14     
13     

     

1,079      $

     
(3)    
–     
–     
–     
106     
(169)    

277     
(374)    
126     
1     

     
875      $
     
(2)    
–     
–     
–     
10     
(34)    

374     
(503)    
171     
2     

     
177      $
     
–     
–     
–     
–     
32     
(46)    

45     
(32)    
9     
9     

     

1,797      $

     
(17)    
–     
–     
–     
641     
(784)    

70     
(202)    
66     
3     

  
138   $
  
–  
(15)  
(9)  
27  
–  
–  

10  
(38)  
14  
5  

  
88   $
  
–  
(2)  
(1)  
49  
–  
–  

213  
(374)  
126  
(2)  

  
–   $
  
–  
–  
–  
327  
–  
–  

6  
(503)  
171  
(1)  

  
34   $
  
–  
–  
–  
5  
–  
–  

38  
(32)  
9  
(6)  

  
437   $
  
–  
(4)  
(2)  
65  
–  
–  

71  
(202)  
66  
(39)  

  
206   $
  
(6)  
205  
(14)  
(2)  
113  
(30)  

(284)  
–  
–  
(2)  

  
480   $
  
(1)  
710  
(97)  
(3)  
128  
(96)  

(697)  
–  
–  
(2)  

  
364   $
  
–  
723  
(105)  
(4)  
6  
(7)  

(742)  
–  
–  
(2)  

  
78   $
  
3  
57  
(11)  
(1)  
36  
(21)  

(77)  
–  
–  
24  

  
995   $
  
1  
581  
(132)  
(4)  
601  
(488)  

(931)  
–  
–  
(57)  

     
160      $
     
(5)    
(182)    
18     
(44)    
–     
(24)    

178     
–     
–     
(9)    

     
733      $
     
–     
(706)    
97     
(58)    
–     
(130)    

633     
–     
–     
–     

     
882      $
     
–     
(723)    
105     
(309)    
–     
(31)    

719     
–     
–     
(1)    

     
29      $
     
1     
(57)    
11     
(2)    
–     
(22)    

64     
–     
–     
31     

     

1,132      $

     
24     
(576)    
161     
(60)    
–     
(500)    

689     
–     
–     
(76)    

  
152   $
  
–  
(23)  
(4)  
46  
–  
–  

15  
(37)  
10  
(21)  

  
96   $
  
–  
(4)  
–  
61  
–  
–  

186  
(387)  
140  
(4)  

  
–   $
  
–  
–  
–  
313  
–  
–  

(17)  
(460)  
163  
1  

  
33   $
  
–  
–  
–  
3  
–  
–  

28  
(32)  
9  
(7)  

  
668   $
  
–  
(5)  
(29)  
64  
–  
–  

44  
(253)  
53  
(105)  

  
518  
  
(11)  
–  
–  
–  
113  
(54)  

(91)  
(37)  
10  
(32)  

416  

  
1,309  
  
(1)  
–  
–  
–  
128  
(226)  

122  
(387)  
140  
(6)  

  
1,246  
  
–  
–  
–  
–  
6  
(38)  

(40)  
(460)  
163  
(2)  

875  

  
140  
  
4  
–  
–  
–  
36  
(43)  

15  
(32)  
9  
48  

177  

  
2,795  
  
25  
–  
–  
–  
601  
(988)  

(198)  
(253)  
53  
(238)  

177   $

716      $

–   $

893      $

233   $

642      $

–   $

73   $

73      $

48   $

194      $

88   $

55      $

34   $

Balance at end of period  

$

597   $

585      $

392   $

1,574      $

566   $

794      $

437   $

1,797  

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

177 

Note 5 Loans and allowance for credit losses (continued)  

Key inputs and assumptions 
The measurement of expected credit losses is a complex calculation that involves a large number of interrelated inputs and 
assumptions and the allowance is not sensitive to any one single factor alone. The key drivers of changes in expected credit 
losses include the following: 

(cid:129) Changes in the credit quality of the borrower or instrument, primarily reflected in changes in internal risk ratings; 
(cid:129) Changes in forward-looking macroeconomic conditions, specifically the macroeconomic variables to which our models are 

calibrated, which are those most closely correlated with credit losses in the relevant portfolio; 

(cid:129) Changes in scenario design and the weights assigned to each scenario; and 
(cid:129) Transfers between stages, which can be triggered by changes to any of the above inputs. 

To reflect relevant risk factors not captured in our modelled results, we applied expert credit judgment in determining significant 
increases in credit risk since origination as well as in the measurement of our weighted allowance for credit losses due to 
uncertainty related to the pace and level of deterioration in economic forecasts. 

Internal risk ratings 
Internal risk ratings are assigned according to the risk management framework outlined under the headings Wholesale credit risk 
and Retail credit risk of the Credit risk section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis. Changes in internal risk ratings are 
primarily reflected in the PD parameters, which are estimated based on our historical loss experience at the relevant risk 
segment or risk rating level, adjusted for forward-looking information. 

Scenario design and weightings 
Our estimation of expected credit losses in Stage 1 and Stage 2 considers five distinct future macroeconomic scenarios. 
Scenarios are designed to capture a wide range of possible outcomes and are weighted according to our expectation of the 
relative likelihood of the range of outcomes that each scenario represents at the reporting date. We weight each scenario to take 
into account historical frequency, current trends, and forward-looking conditions which will change over time. The base case 
scenario is based on forecasts of the expected rate, value or yield for each relevant macroeconomic variable. The upside and 
downside scenarios are set by adjusting our base projections to construct reasonably possible scenarios and weightings that are 
more optimistic and pessimistic, respectively, than the base case. Two additional downside scenarios capture the non-linear 
nature of potential credit losses across our portfolios. 

The impact of each of our five scenarios varies across our portfolios given the portfolios have different sensitivities to 
movements in each macroeconomic variable. We reassessed our scenario weights to increase weight to the downside scenarios 
relative to October 31, 2021 in order to reflect the uncertainty and downside risk of deeper recessions than contemplated in our 
base scenario. 

The impact of weighting these multiple scenarios increased our ACL on performing loans, relative to our base scenario, by 
$738 million at October 31, 2022 (October 31, 2021 – $726 million). 

Forward looking macroeconomic variables 
The PD, LGD and EAD inputs used to estimate Stage 1 and Stage 2 credit loss allowances are modelled based on the 
macroeconomic variables (or changes in macroeconomic variables) that are most closely correlated with credit losses in the 
relevant portfolio. Each macroeconomic scenario used in our expected credit loss calculation includes a projection of all 
relevant macroeconomic variables used in our models for a five year horizon, reverting to long-run averages generally within the 
2 to 5 year period. Depending on their usage in the models, macroeconomic variables are projected at a country, province/state 
or more granular level. These include one or more of the variables described below, which differ by portfolio and region. 

Our allowance for credit losses reflects our economic outlook as at October 31, 2022. Subsequent changes to this forecast and 
related estimates will be reflected in our allowance for credit losses in future periods. 

Our base scenario reflects rising unemployment rates, high inflation, production capacity limits, supply chain pressures, and 

increased expectations for central banks to continue increasing interest rates which results in moderate recessions expected in 
Canada and the U.S. in calendar 2023. Our base scenario also reflects declining housing prices in Canada. 

Downside scenarios, including two additional and more severe downside scenarios designed for the energy and real estate 

sectors, reflect the possibility of a more severe macroeconomic shock beginning in calendar Q1 2023 relative to our base 
scenario. Conditions are expected to deteriorate from calendar Q4 2022 levels for up to 18 months, followed by a recovery for the 
remainder of the period. These scenarios assume monetary policy responses that return the economy to a long-run, sustainable 
growth rate within the forecast period. The possibility of a deeper recession and a more prolonged recovery as compared to our 
base scenario, including further monetary policy responses to elevated inflation rates which may increase credit risk, is reflected 
in our general downside scenario. 

The upside scenario reflects slightly stronger economic growth than the base scenario, without prompting a further 
offsetting monetary policy response as compared to our base scenario, followed by a return to a long-run sustainable growth 
rate within the forecast period. 

178

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

The following provides additional detail about our calendar quarter forecasts for certain key macroeconomic variables used in 
the models to estimate ACL: 

(cid:129) Unemployment – In our base forecast, calendar Q4 2022 unemployment rates are expected to rise to 5.6% in Canada and 

3.9% in the U.S., peaking by Q4 2023 at 6.8% in Canada and 5.1% in the U.S., and reverting to the long run equilibrium towards 
the latter end of the forecast horizon. 

Canada Unemployment Rate (1)

U.S. Unemployment Rate (1)

%

11

%

10

Q 1-2022
Q 4-2021

Q 2-2022

Q 3-2022

Q 4-2022
Q 1-2023

Q 2-2023

Q 3-2023

Q 1-2024
Q 4-2023

Q 2-2024

Q 3-2024

Q 1-2025
Q 4-2024

Q 2-2025

Q 3-2025

Q 1-2026
Q 4-2025

Q 2-2026

Q 3-2026

Q 4-2026

Q 1-2027

Q 2-2027

Q 3-2027

Q 4-2021

Q 1-2022

Q 2-2022

Q 3-2022

Q 4-2022

Q 1-2023

Q 2-2023

Q 3-2023

Q 4-2023
Q 1-2024

Q 2-2024

Q 3-2024

Q 4-2024

Q 1-2025

Q 2-2025

Q 3-2025

Q 4-2025
Q 1-2026

Q 2-2026

Q 3-2026

Q 4-2026

Q 1-2027

Q 2-2027

Q 3-2027

Range of alternative scenarios (October 31, 2022)

Base scenario (October 31, 2022)

Range of alternative scenarios (October 31, 2022)

Base scenario (October 31, 2022)

Base scenario (October 31, 2021)

Base scenario (October 31, 2021)

(1) Represents the average quarterly unemployment level over the calendar quarters presented.

(1) Represents the average quarterly unemployment level over the calendar quarters presented.

  

(cid:129) Gross Domestic Product (GDP) – In our base forecast, we expect Canadian and U.S GDP growth to slow and for both regions 
to experience moderate recessions during the first half of calendar 2023. GDP in calendar Q4 2023 is expected to be 0.2% 
below Q4 2022 levels in Canada, and 0.4% below such levels in the U.S. 

Canada Real GDP (1)

Trillions of Canadian dollars

U.S. Real GDP (1)

Trillions of U.S. dollars

8

6

4

2

22.5

22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

9

7

5

3

2.5

2.4

2.3

2.2

2.1

2.0

1.9

Q 4-2021

Q 1-2022

Q 2-2022

Q 3-2022

Q 4-2022

Q 1-2023

Q 2-2023

Q 3-2023

Q 4-2023

Q 1-2024

Q 2-2024

Q 3-2024

Q 4-2024

Q 1-2025

Q 2-2025

Q 3-2025

Q 4-2025

Q 1-2026

Q 2-2026

Q 3-2026

Q 4-2026

Q 1-2027

Q 2-2027

Q 3-2027

Q 4-2021
Q 1-2022

Q 2-2022

Q 3-2022

Q 4-2022

Q 2-2023
Q 1-2023

Q 3-2023

Q 4-2023
Q 1-2024

Q 2-2024

Q 3-2024

Q 4-2024
Q 1-2025

Q 2-2025

Q 3-2025

Q 4-2025

Q 1-2026

Q 2-2026

Q 3-2026

Q 4-2026

Q 1-2027

Q 2-2027

Q 3-2027

Range of alternative scenarios (October 31, 2022)

Base scenario (October 31, 2022)

Range of alternative scenarios (October 31, 2022)

Base scenario (October 31, 2022)

Base scenario (October 31, 2021)

Base scenario (October 31, 2021)

(1) Represents the seasonally adjusted annual rate indexed to 2012 Canadian dollars over the calendar

(1) Represents the seasonally adjusted annual rate indexed to 2012 U.S dollars over the calendar

quarters presented.

  

quarters presented.

(cid:129) Oil price (West Texas Intermediate in US$) – In our base forecast, we expect oil prices to average $88 per barrel over the 

next 12 months from calendar Q4 2022 and $72 per barrel in the following 2 to 5 years. The range of average prices in our 
alternative downside and upside scenarios is $29 to $114 per barrel for the next 12 months and $42 to $77 per barrel for the 
following 2 to 5 years. As at October 31, 2021, our base forecast included an average price of $71 per barrel for the next 
12 months and $56 per barrel for the following 2 to 5 years. 

(cid:129) Canadian housing price index – In our base forecast, we expect housing prices to decrease by (1.0)% over the next 

12 months from calendar Q4 2022, with a compound annual growth rate of 5.2% for the following 2 to 5 years. The range of 
annual housing price growth (contraction) in our alternative real estate downside and upside scenarios is (30.0)% to 10.9% 
over the next 12 months and 4.2% to 9.5% for the following 2 to 5 years. As at October 31, 2021 our base forecast included 
housing price growth of 0.1% from calendar Q4 2021 for the next 12 months and 4.1% for the following 2 to 5 years. 

The primary variables driving credit losses in our retail portfolios are Canadian unemployment rates, Canadian housing price 
index and Canadian GDP. The Canadian overnight interest rate also impacts our retail portfolios. Our wholesale portfolios are 
affected by all of the variables discussed above; however, the specific variables differ by sector. Other variables also impact our 
wholesale portfolios including, but not limited to, Canadian and U.S. 10 year BBB corporate bond credit spreads, Canadian and 
U.S. 10 year government bond yields, U.S. 10 year BBB corporate bond yield, Canadian consumer confidence index, Canadian and 
U.S. commercial real estate price indices, U.S. housing price index, and natural gas prices (Henry Hub). 

Increases in the following macroeconomic variables will generally correlate with higher expected credit losses: Canadian 

and U.S. unemployment rates, Canadian overnight interest rates, Canadian and U.S. 10 year BBB corporate bond credit spreads, 
Canadian and U.S. 10 year government bond yields, and U.S. 10 year BBB corporate bond yield. 

Increases in the following macroeconomic variables will generally correlate with lower expected credit losses: Canadian and 

U.S. housing price indices, Canadian and U.S. GDP, Canadian consumer confidence index, Canadian and U.S. commercial real 
estate price indices, and oil and natural gas prices. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

179 

  

  

Note 5 Loans and allowance for credit losses (continued)  

Transfers between stages 
Transfers between Stage 1 and Stage 2 are based on the assessment of significant increases in credit risk relative to initial 
recognition, as described in Note 2. The impact of moving from 12 months expected credit losses to lifetime expected credit 
losses, or vice versa, varies by product and is dependent on the expected remaining life at the date of the transfer. Stage 
transfers may result in significant fluctuations in expected credit losses. 

The following table illustrates the impact of staging on our ACL by comparing our allowance if all performing loans were in 

Stage 1 to the actual ACL recorded on these assets. 

  

  

  

October 31, 2022  

October 31, 2021  

As at   

  

ACL – All performing  
loans in Stage 1  

Impact of  
staging  

Stage 1 and 2  

ACL     

ACL – All performing  
loans in Stage 1  

Impact of  
staging  

Stage 1 and 2  
ACL  

Performing loans (1)  

$ 2,373   $ 1,094   $ 3,467    

$ 2,521   $ 1,125  

$ 3,646  

(1) 

Represents loans and commitments in Stage 1 and Stage 2. 

180

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

  

  

  

  

  

As at  

  

     

     

Credit risk exposure by internal risk rating 
The following table presents the gross carrying amount of loans measured at amortized cost, and the full contractual amount of 
undrawn loan commitments subject to the impairment requirements of IFRS 9. Risk ratings are based on internal ratings used in 
the measurement of expected credit losses as at the reporting date, as outlined in the internal ratings maps for Wholesale and 
Retail facilities in the Credit risk section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis. 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Stage 1  

Stage 2   Stage 3 (1)  

Total     

Stage 1  

Stage 2   Stage 3 (1)  

Total  

October 31, 2022  

October 31, 2021  

Loans outstanding – Residential  

  

  

Retail  

mortgages  

Low risk  
Medium risk  
High risk  
Not rated (2)  
Impaired  

  

Total  

  

  

  

  
–   $ 311,841  
17,203  
–  
3,977  
–  
46,425  
–  
645  
645  

  

241  

   $ 380,332  

$ 340,716   $  2,573   $ 

15,035  
1,188  
51,915  
–  

408,854  

1,932  
3,125  
1,304  
–  

8,934  

–   $ 343,289      $ 310,334   $ 1,507   $
–  
–  
–  
560  

16,967     
4,313     
53,219     
560     

15,152  
3,343  
45,512  
–  

2,051  
634  
913  
–  

560  

418,348     

374,341  

5,105  

645  

380,091  

Items not subject to impairment (3)  

  

448     

   $ 418,796     

Loans outstanding – Personal  
Low risk  
Medium risk  
High risk  
Not rated (2)  
Impaired  

$ 73,339   $ 2,575   $

5,482  
836  
9,733  
–  

3,780  
1,660  
104  
–  

  

  

     
–   $ 75,914      $ 72,267   $
–  
–  
–  
200  

9,262     
2,496     
9,837     
200     

4,974  
687  
8,934  
–  

  
698   $

4,551  
1,045  
88  
–  

  

  
–   $ 72,965  
9,525  
–  
1,732  
–  
9,022  
–  
197  
197  

Total  

$ 89,390   $ 8,119   $

200   $ 97,709      $ 86,862   $ 6,382   $

197   $ 93,441  

Loans outstanding – Credit cards  
Low risk  
Medium risk  
High risk  
Not rated (2)  

$ 15,088   $

  
83   $

1,418  
39  
751  

1,911  
1,255  
32  

  

  

     
–   $ 15,171      $ 12,864   $
–  
–  
–  

3,329     
1,294     
783     

1,646  
136  
527  

  
24   $

1,645  
937  
43  

  

  
–   $ 12,888  
3,291  
–  
1,073  
–  
570  
–  

Total  

$ 17,296   $ 3,281   $

–   $ 20,577      $ 15,173   $ 2,649   $

–   $ 17,822  

Loans outstanding – Small business   
Low risk  
Medium risk  
High risk  
Not rated (2)  
Impaired  

$

8,571   $
1,512  
102  
3  
–  

  
838   $

1,130  
375  
–  
–  

  
–   $
–  
–  
–  
138  

     

9,409      $
2,642     
477     
3     
138     

  

8,609   $
1,583  
227  
4  
–  

Undrawn loan commitments – Retail  
Low risk  
Medium risk  
High risk  
Not rated (2)  

9,021  
876  
5,668  

  

246  
367  
118  

  

  

     
–   $ 248,661      $ 229,516   $
–  
–  
–  

9,267     
1,243     
5,786     

9,475  
1,205  
4,854  

$ 247,620   $ 1,041   $

  
274   $
979  
218  
–  
–  

  
574   $
133  
97  
90  

  
–   $
–  
–  
–  
109  

  
8,883  
2,562  
445  
4  
109  

  

  
–   $ 230,090  
9,608  
–  
1,302  
–  
4,944  
–  

Total  

$ 10,188   $ 2,343   $

138   $ 12,669      $ 10,423   $ 1,471   $

109   $ 12,003  

Total  

$ 263,185   $ 1,772   $

–   $ 264,957      $ 245,050   $

894   $

–   $ 245,944  

Wholesale – Loans outstanding   

Investment grade  
Non-investment grade  
Not rated (2)  
Impaired  

  
202   $

$ 88,513   $
145,908  
11,789  
–  

15,758  
360  
–  

  

     
–   $ 88,715      $ 62,975   $
–  
–  
1,301  

161,666     
12,149     
1,301     

117,396  
9,339  
–  

  

  
226   $

15,146  
430  
–  

  

  
–   $ 63,201  
132,542  
–  
9,769  
–  
1,357  
1,357  

246,210  

16,320  

1,301  

263,831     

189,710  

15,802  

1,357  

206,869  

  

Total  

Items not subject to impairment (3)  

Undrawn loan commitments –  

Wholesale  

Investment grade  
Non-investment grade  
Not rated (2)  

Total  

  

  

10,136     

   $ 273,967     

  
179   $

$ 284,481   $
126,225  
3,692  

10,657  
1  

     

–   $ 284,660      $ 246,539   $ 1,122   $
–  
–  

136,882     
3,693     

108,063  
3,476  

12,377  
1  

$ 414,398   $ 10,837   $

–   $ 425,235      $ 358,078   $ 13,500   $

–   $ 371,578  

  

11,197  

   $ 218,066  

  

  
–   $ 247,661  
120,440  
–  
3,477  
–  

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

As at October 31, 2022, 88% of credit-impaired loans were either fully or partially collateralized (October 31, 2021 – 86%). For details on the types of collateral held against 
credit-impaired assets and our policies on collateral, refer to the Credit risk mitigation section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis. 
In certain cases where an internal risk rating is not assigned, we use other approved credit risk assessments or rating methodologies, policies and tools to manage our 
credit risk. 
Items not subject to impairment are loans held at FVTPL. 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

181 

Note 5 Loans and allowance for credit losses (continued)  

Loans past due but not impaired (1), (2) 

  

  

  

(1) 
(2) 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Retail  
Wholesale  

Note 6 Significant acquisition  

October 31, 2022  

October 31, 2021  

As at   

  

30 to 89 days  

Total    30 to 89 days  

90 days  
and greater  

90 days  
and greater  

Total  

$

$

1,328   $
1,279  

2,607   $

168   $ 1,496    $

2  

1,281    

170   $ 2,777    $

1,105   $
1,230  

2,335   $

137   $ 1,242  
1,230  

–  

137   $ 2,472  

Excludes loans less than 30 days past due as they are not generally representative of the borrowers’ ability to meet their payment obligations. 
Amounts presented may include loans past due as a result of administrative processes, such as mortgage loans on which payments are restrained pending payout due to 
sale or refinancing. Past due loans arising from administrative processes are not representative of the borrowers’ ability to meet their payment obligations. 

Wealth Management 
On September 27, 2022, we completed the acquisition of 100% of the issued share capital of Brewin Dolphin Holdings PLC (Brewin 
Dolphin) via our subsidiary, RBC Wealth Management (Jersey) Holdings Limited. Brewin Dolphin provides discretionary wealth 
management services in the U.K., Ireland and the Channel Islands. Brewin Dolphin’s business gives us a platform to significantly 
transform our wealth management business in the U.K., Ireland and the Channel Islands, and provides us with the opportunity to 
position the combined businesses as a premier integrated wealth management provider to private and institutional clients. 

Total consideration of £1,591 million ($2,341 million) as of the date of close consisted of £1,564 million ($2,302 million) in cash, 

as well as amounts related to share based compensation. Based on the estimated fair values, our preliminary purchase price 
allocation assigns $3,279 million to assets and $938 million to liabilities, including customer relationship intangible assets of 
$1,292 million and goodwill of $913 million, which is allocated to our International Wealth Management and Global Asset 
Management CGUs and is not deductible for tax purposes. Goodwill reflects the expected synergies from the combined 
businesses and the expected growth of the Wealth Management segment. The estimates for the fair values of the assets acquired 
and liabilities assumed may be retroactively adjusted to reflect new information obtained about facts and circumstances that 
existed as at the acquisition date during the measurement period. 

The results of the acquisition have been consolidated from the date of close and included in our Wealth Management 

segment. 

Note 7 Derecognition of financial assets  

We enter into transactions in which we transfer financial assets such as loans or securities to structured entities or other third 
parties. The majority of assets transferred under repurchase agreements, securities lending agreements, and in our Canadian 
residential mortgage securitization transactions do not qualify for derecognition as we continue to be exposed to substantially 
all of the risks and rewards of the transferred assets, such as prepayment, credit, price, interest rate and foreign exchange risks. 

Transferred financial assets derecognized 
Government relief programs 
To support our clients through unprecedented times due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we participated in government relief 
programs in Canada and in the U.S. 

Under the Canadian Emergency Business Account program, we provided interest-free loans to existing eligible small 
business clients funded by the Export Development Bank of Canada (EDC). As we do not retain substantially all of the risks and 
rewards of the financial assets, and all cash flows are passed through to the EDC, these loans are not recognized on our 
Consolidated Balance Sheets. The application window for the CEBA program closed on June 30, 2021. 

Transferred financial assets not derecognized 
Securitization of Canadian residential mortgage loans 
We periodically securitize insured Canadian residential mortgage loans through the creation of MBS pools under the National 
Housing Act MBS (NHA MBS) program. All loans securitized under the NHA MBS program are required to be insured by the 
Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMHC) or a third-party insurer. We require the borrower to pay for mortgage 
insurance when the loan amount is greater than 80% of the original appraised value of the property (LTV ratio). For residential 
mortgage loans securitized under this program with LTV ratios less than 80%, we are required to insure the mortgages at our own 
expense. Under the NHA MBS program, we are responsible for making all payments due on our issued MBS, regardless of whether 
we collect the necessary funds from the mortgagor or the insurer. When a borrower defaults on a mortgage, we submit a claim to 
the insurer if the amount recovered from the collection or foreclosure process is lower than the sum of the principal balance, 
accrued interest and collection costs on the outstanding loan. The insurance claim process is managed by the insurance provider 
in accordance with the insurer’s policies and covers the entire unpaid loan balance plus generally up to 12 months of interest, 
selling costs and other eligible expenses. If an insurance claim is denied, a loss is recognized in Provision for credit losses in our 
Consolidated Statements of Income. The amount recorded as a loss is not significant to our Consolidated Financial Statements 
and no significant losses were incurred due to legal action arising from mortgage defaults during 2022 and 2021. 

We sell the NHA MBS pools primarily to Canada Housing Trust, a government-sponsored structured entity under the Canada 
Mortgage Bond (CMB) program. The entity periodically issues CMBs, which are guaranteed by the government, and sells them to 
third-party investors. Proceeds of the CMB issuances are used by the entity to purchase the NHA MBS pools from eligible NHA 
MBS issuers who participate in the issuance of a particular CMB series. Our continuing involvement includes servicing the 
underlying residential mortgage loans we have securitized, either ourselves or through a third-party servicer. We also act as 

182

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

counterparty in interest rate swap agreements where we pay the entity the interest due to CMB investors and receive the interest 
on the underlying MBS and reinvested assets. As part of the swaps, we are also required to maintain a principal reinvestment 
account for principal payments received on the underlying mortgage loans to meet the repayment obligation upon maturity of 
the CMB. We reinvest the collected principal payments in permitted investments as outlined in the swap agreements. 

We have determined that certain of the NHA MBS program loans transferred to the entity do not qualify for derecognition as 
we have not transferred substantially all of the risks and rewards of ownership. As a result, these transferred MBS continue to be 
classified as residential mortgage loans and recognized on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. The cash received for these 
transferred MBS is treated as a secured borrowing and a corresponding liability is recorded in Deposits – Business and 
government on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 

Securities sold under repurchase agreements and securities loaned 
We also enter into transactions such as repurchase agreements and securities lending agreements where we transfer assets under 
agreements to repurchase them at a future date and retain substantially all of the risks and rewards associated with the assets. These 
transferred assets remain on our Consolidated Balance Sheets and are accounted for as collateralized borrowing transactions. 

The following table provides information on the carrying amount and fair value of the transferred assets that did not qualify for 
derecognition, and their associated liabilities. 

  
  

October 31, 2022  

October 31, 2021  

As at  

  

Canadian  
residential  
mortgage  
loans (1), (2)  

Securities  
sold under  
repurchase  
agreements (3)  

Securities  
loaned (3)  

Total     

Canadian  
residential  
mortgage  
loans (1), (2)  

Securities  
sold under  
repurchase  
agreements (3)  

Securities  
loaned (3)  

Total  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Carrying amount of transferred  
assets that do not qualify for  
derecognition  

Carrying amount of associated  

$ 32,812   $

258,615   $ 15,332   $ 306,759     $

34,052  $

252,920   $

9,281   $ 296,253  

liabilities  

32,177  

258,615  

15,332  

306,124     

33,769  

252,920  

9,281  

295,970  

Fair value of transferred assets   $ 31,174   $
Fair value of associated  

258,615   $ 15,332   $ 305,121     $

34,142  $

252,920   $

9,281   $ 296,343  

liabilities  

30,900  

258,615  

15,332  

304,847     

34,073  

252,920  

9,281  

296,274  

Fair value of net position  

$

274   $

–   $

–   $

274     $

69  $

–   $

–   $

69  

(1) 

Includes Canadian residential mortgage loans transferred primarily to Canada Housing Trust at the initial securitization and other permitted investments used for 
funding requirements after the initial securitization. 

(2)  CMB investors have legal recourse only to the transferred assets, and do not have recourse to our general assets. 
(3)  Does not include over-collateralization of assets pledged. 

Note 8 Structured entities  

In the normal course of business, we engage in a variety of financial transactions with structured entities to support our 
financing and investing needs as well as those of our clients. A structured entity is an entity in which voting or similar rights are 
not the dominant factor in deciding control. Structured entities are generally created to achieve a narrow and well defined 
objective with restrictions around their ongoing activities. We consolidate a structured entity when we control the entity in 
accordance with our accounting policy as described in Note 2. In other cases, we may sponsor or have an interest in such an 
entity but may not consolidate it. 

Consolidated structured entities 
We consolidate the following structured entities, whose assets and liabilities are recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
Third-party investors in these structured entities generally have recourse only to the assets of the related entity and do not have 
recourse to our general assets unless we breach our contractual obligations to those entities. In the ordinary course of business, 
the assets of each consolidated structured entity can generally only be used to settle the obligations of that entity. 

RBC-administered multi-seller conduits 
We generally do not maintain ownership in the multi-seller conduits that we administer and generally do not have rights to, or 
control of, their assets. However, we issue asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) through a multi-seller conduit that does not 
have an expected loss investor with substantive power to direct the significant operating activities of the conduit. This conduit is 
consolidated because we have exposure to variability of returns from performance in the multi-seller arrangements through 
providing transaction-specific and program-wide liquidity, credit and loan facilities to the conduit and have decision-making 
power over the relevant activities. As of October 31, 2022, $1,826 million of financial assets held by the conduit was included in 
Loans (October 31, 2021 – $1,076 million) and $1,284 million of ABCP issued by the conduit was included in Deposits (October 31, 
2021 – $665 million) on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 

Credit card securitization vehicle 
We securitize a portion of our credit card receivables through a structured entity on a revolving basis. The entity purchases 
co-ownership interests in a pool of credit card receivables and issues senior and subordinated term notes collateralized by that 
co-ownership interest in the underlying pool of credit card receivables. Investors who purchase the term notes have recourse 
only to that co-ownership interest in the underlying pool of credit card receivables. 

We continue to service the credit card receivables and perform an administrative role for the entity. We also retain risk in 
the underlying pool of credit card receivables through our retained interest in the transferred assets, the cash reserve balance 
we fund from time to time, and also through certain subordinated notes which we retain. Additionally, we may own some senior 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

183 

Note 8 Structured entities (continued)  

notes as investments or for market-making activities and we act as counterparty to interest rate and cross currency swap 
agreements which hedge the entity’s interest rate and currency risk exposure.  

We consolidate the structured entity because we have decision-making power over the timing and size of future issuances 
and other relevant activities which were predetermined by us at inception. We also obtain significant funding benefits and are 
exposed to variability from the performance of the underlying credit card receivables through our retained interest. As at 
October 31, 2022, $6 billion of notes issued by our credit card securitization vehicle were included in Deposits on our 
Consolidated Balance Sheets (October 31, 2021 – $3 billion). 

Collateralized commercial paper vehicle 
We established a funding vehicle that provides loans to us and finances those loans by issuing commercial paper to third-party 
investors. The structured entity’s commercial paper carries an equivalent credit rating to RBC because we are obligated to 
advance funds to the entity in the event there are insufficient funds from other sources to settle maturing commercial paper. We 
pledge collateral to secure the loans and are exposed to the market and credit risks of the pledged securities. 

We consolidate the structured entity because we have decision-making power over the relevant activities, are the sole 
borrower from the structure, and are exposed to a majority of the residual ownership risks through the credit support provided. 
As at October 31, 2022, $14 billion of commercial paper issued by the vehicle was included in Deposits on our Consolidated 
Balance Sheets (October 31, 2021 – $13 billion). 

Covered bonds 
We periodically transfer mortgages to RBC Covered Bond Guarantor Limited Partnership (the Guarantor LP) to support funding 
activities and asset coverage requirements under our covered bonds program. The Guarantor LP was created to guarantee 
interest and principal payments under the covered bond program. The covered bonds guaranteed by the Guarantor LP are direct, 
unsecured and unconditional obligations of RBC; therefore, investors have a claim against the Bank which will continue if the 
covered bonds are not paid by the Bank and the mortgage assets in the Guarantor LP are insufficient to satisfy the obligations 
owing on the covered bonds. We act as general partner, limited partner, swap counterparty, lender and liquidity provider to the 
Guarantor LP, servicer for the underlying mortgages as well as the registered issuer of the covered bonds. 

We consolidate the Guarantor LP as we have the decision-making power over the relevant activities through our role as 
general partner and are exposed to variability from the performance of the underlying mortgages. As at October 31, 2022, the 
total amount of mortgages transferred and outstanding was $121 billion (October 31, 2021 – $80 billion) and $43 billion of covered 
bonds were recorded as Deposits on our Consolidated Balance Sheets (October 31, 2021 – $37 billion). 

Municipal bond TOB structures 
We sell taxable and tax-exempt municipal bonds into Tender Option Bond (TOB) structures, which consist of a bond that is credit 
enhanced by us and purchased by a TOB trust. The TOB trust finances the purchase from us by issuing floating-rate certificates to 
short-term investors and a residual certificate that is purchased by us. We are the remarketing agent for the floating-rate 
certificates and provide a liquidity facility to the short-term investors which requires us to purchase any certificates tendered but 
not successfully remarketed. We credit enhance the bond purchased by the TOB trust with a letter of credit under which we are 
required to extend funding if there are any losses on the underlying bonds. We earn interest on the residual certificate and 
receive market-based fees for acting as remarketing agent and providing the liquidity facility and letter of credit. 

We consolidate the TOB trust when we are the holder of the residual certificate as we have decision-making power over the 

relevant activities, including the selection of the underlying municipal bonds and the ability to terminate the structure, and are 
exposed to variability from the performance of the underlying municipal bonds. As at October 31, 2022, $6 billion of municipal 
bonds were included in Investment securities related to consolidated TOB structures (October 31, 2021 – $7 billion) and a 
corresponding $7 billion of floating-rate certificates were included in Deposits on our Consolidated Balance Sheets 
(October 31, 2021 – $7 billion). 

RBC managed investment funds 
We are sponsors and investment managers of mutual and pooled funds, which give us the ability to direct the investment 
decisions of the funds. We consolidate those mutual and pooled funds in which our interests, which include direct investment in 
seed capital plus management or performance fees, indicate that we are acting as a principal. As at October 31, 2022, $524 million 
of Trading securities held in the consolidated funds (October 31, 2021 – $514 million) and $363 million of Other liabilities 
representing the fund units held by third parties (October 31, 2021 – $365 million) were recorded on our Consolidated Balance 
Sheets. 

Unconsolidated structured entities 
We have interests in certain structured entities that we do not consolidate but have recorded assets and liabilities on our 
Consolidated Balance Sheets related to our transactions and involvement with these entities. 

184

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

The following table presents the assets and liabilities recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets and our maximum 

exposure to loss related to our interests in unconsolidated structured entities. It also presents the size of each class of 
unconsolidated structured entity, as measured by the total assets of the entities in which we have an interest. 

Maximum exposure to loss (2)  

$ 48,260   $ 8,658   $

3,758   $ 14,339   $

5,523   $

80,538  

Total assets of unconsolidated structured entities   $ 47,289   $ 26,543   $ 548,320   $ 64,361   $ 554,573   $ 1,241,086  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
On-balance sheet assets  

Securities  
Loans  
Derivatives  
Other assets  

On-balance sheet liabilities  

Derivatives  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
On-balance sheet assets  

Securities  
Loans  
Derivatives  
Other assets  

On-balance sheet liabilities  

Derivatives  

Multi-seller  
conduits (1)  
  
255   $
–  
25  
–  

Structured  
finance  
  
–   $

5,334  
–  
6  

  
171   $

171   $

  
–   $

–   $

As at October 31, 2022  

Non-RBC  
managed  
investment  
funds  
  

3,089   $

Third-party  
securitization  
vehicles  
  
–   $

8,494  
–  
–  

–  
–  
–  

  
–   $

–   $

Other  
  

595   $

2,487  
100  
568  

Total  
  
3,939  
16,315  
125  
574  

  
–   $

–   $

  
–   $

–   $

  
171  

171  

280   $ 5,340   $

3,089   $

8,494   $

3,750   $

20,953  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Multi-seller  
conduits (1)  
  
12   $
–  
17  
–  

Structured  
finance  
  
–   $

4,569  
–  
27  

As at October 31, 2021  

Non-RBC  
managed  
investment  
funds  
  

Third-party  
securitization  
vehicles  
  
–   $

6,855  
–  
–  

3,047   $
–  
–  
–  

Other  
  
537   $

1,453  
108  
363  

29   $

4,596   $

3,047   $

6,855   $

2,461   $

  
93   $

93   $

  
–   $

–   $

  
–   $

–   $

  
–   $

–   $

  
–   $

–   $

Total  
  
3,596  
12,877  
125  
390  

16,988  

  
93  

93  

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

Maximum exposure to loss (2)  

40,893   $

8,361   $

3,651   $

12,214   $

4,057   $

69,176  

Total assets of unconsolidated structured entities   $

40,074   $ 19,881   $ 506,699   $

80,458   $ 392,348   $

1,039,460  

(1) 

(2) 

Total assets of unconsolidated structured entities represent the maximum assets that may have to be purchased by the conduits under purchase commitments 
outstanding. Of the purchase commitments outstanding, the conduits have purchased financial assets totalling $32 billion as at October 31, 2022 (October 31, 2021 – 
$25 billion). 
The maximum exposure to loss resulting from our interests in these entities consists mostly of investments, loans, fair value of derivatives, liquidity and credit 
enhancement facilities. The maximum exposure to loss of the multi-seller conduits is higher than the on-balance sheet assets primarily because of the notional amounts 
of the backstop liquidity and credit enhancement facilities. Refer to Note 24. 

Below is a description of our involvement with each significant class of unconsolidated structured entity. 

Multi-seller conduits 
We administer multi-seller ABCP conduit programs. Multi-seller conduits primarily purchase financial assets from clients and 
finance those purchases by issuing ABCP. 

In certain multi-seller conduit arrangements, we do not maintain any ownership of the multi-seller conduits that we 

administer and have no rights to, or control of, its assets. As the administrative agent, we earn a residual fee for providing 
services such as coordinating funding activities, transaction structuring, documentation, execution and monitoring. The ABCP 
issued by each multi-seller conduit is in the conduit’s own name with recourse to the financial assets owned by the multi-seller 
conduit, and is non-recourse to us except through our participation in liquidity and/or credit enhancement facilities. 

We provide transaction-specific and program-wide liquidity facilities to the multi-seller conduits. In addition, we provide 
program-wide credit enhancement to the multi-seller conduits which obligate us to purchase assets or advance funds in the 
event the multi-seller conduit does not otherwise have funds from other sources, such as from the liquidity facilities, to settle 
maturing ABCP. In some cases, we or another third party may provide transaction-specific credit enhancement which can take 
various forms. We receive market-based fees for providing these liquidity and credit facilities. 

For certain transactions, we act as counterparty to various hedging contracts to facilitate our clients’ securitization of fixed 

rate and/or foreign currency denominated assets through the conduits. These may take the form of forward contracts, interest 
rate swaps or cross currency swaps. These derivatives expose us to foreign exchange and interest rate risks that are centrally 
managed by our foreign exchange trading and swap desks, respectively, and credit risk on the underlying assets that is mitigated 
by the credit enhancement described below. 

Each transaction is structured with transaction-specific first loss protection provided by the third-party seller. This 

enhancement can take various forms, including but not limited to overcollateralization, excess spread, subordinated classes of 
financial assets, guarantees or letters of credit. The amount of this enhancement varies but is generally designed to cover a 
multiple of historical losses. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

185 

Note 8 Structured entities (continued)  

An unrelated third party (expected loss investor) absorbs losses, up to a maximum contractual amount, that may occur in 

the future on the assets in the multi-seller conduits before the multi-seller conduits’ debt holders and us. In return for assuming 
this multi-seller conduit first-loss position, each multi-seller conduit pays the expected loss investor a return commensurate with 
its risk position. The expected loss investor has substantive power to direct the majority of the activities which significantly 
impact the conduit’s economic performance, including initial selection and approval of the asset purchase commitments and 
liquidity facilities, approval of renewal and amendment of these transactions and facilities, sale or transfer of assets, ongoing 
monitoring of asset performance, mitigation of losses, and management of the ABCP liabilities. 

We do not consolidate these multi-seller conduits as we do not control the conduits as noted above. 

Structured finance 
We participate in certain municipal bond TOB structures that we do not consolidate. These structures are similar to those 
consolidated municipal bond TOB structures described above; however, the residual certificates are held by third parties. We provide 
liquidity facilities for the benefit of floating-rate certificate holders which may be drawn if certificates are tendered but not able to be 
remarketed. For a portion of these trusts, we also provide a letter of credit for the underlying bonds held in the trust. We do not have 
decision-making power over the relevant activities of the structures; therefore, we do not consolidate these structures. 

We provide senior warehouse financing to unaffiliated structured entities that are established by third parties to acquire 
loans for the purposes of issuing a term collateralized loan obligation (CLO) transaction. Subordinated financing is provided 
during the warehouse phase by either the collateral manager or third-party investors. Subordinated financing serves as the first 
loss tranche which absorbs losses prior to ourselves as the senior lender. We act as the arranger and placement agent for the 
term CLO transaction. Proceeds from the sale of the term CLO are used to repay our senior warehouse financing, at which point 
we have no further involvement with the transaction. We do not consolidate these CLO structures as we do not have decision-
making power over the relevant activities of the entity, which include the initial selection and subsequent management of the 
underlying debt portfolio. 

We provide senior financing to unaffiliated structured entities that are established by third parties to acquire loans. 
Subordinated financing is provided by either the collateral manager or third-party investors. Subordinated financing serves as 
the first loss tranche which absorbs losses prior to ourselves as the senior lender. These facilities tend to be longer in term than 
the CLO warehouse facilities and benefit from credit enhancement generally designed to cover a multiple of historical losses. We 
do not consolidate these structures as we do not have decision making power over the relevant activities of the entity, which 
include the initial selection and subsequent management of the underlying debt portfolio. 

Non-RBC managed investment funds 
We enter into fee-based equity derivative transactions with third parties including mutual funds, unit investment trusts and other 
investment funds. These transactions provide their investors with the desired exposure to reference funds, and we economically 
hedge our exposure to these derivatives by investing in those reference funds. We also act as custodian for several funds. We do 
not consolidate those reference funds that are managed by third parties as we do not have power to direct their investing 
activities. 

We provide liquidity facilities to certain third-party investment funds. The funds issue unsecured variable-rate preferred 
shares and invest in portfolios of tax-exempt municipal bonds. Undrawn liquidity commitments expose us to the liquidity risk of 
the preferred shares and drawn commitments expose us to the credit risk of the underlying municipal bonds. We do not 
consolidate these third-party managed funds as we do not have power to direct their investing activities. 

Third-party securitization vehicles 
We hold interests in securitization vehicles that provide funding to certain third parties on whose behalf the entities were created. The 
activities of these entities are limited to the purchase and sale of specified financial assets from the sponsor. We, as well as other 
financial institutions, are obligated to provide funding up to our maximum commitment level and are exposed to credit losses on the 
underlying assets after various credit enhancements. Enhancements can take various forms, including but not limited to 
overcollateralization, excess spread, subordinated classes of financial assets, guarantees or letters of credit. The amount of this 
enhancement varies but is generally designed to cover a multiple of historical losses. We do not consolidate these entities as we do 
not have decision-making power over the relevant activities, including the entities’ investing and financing activities. 

Other 
Other unconsolidated structured entities include managed investment funds, credit investment products and tax credit funds. 
We are sponsors and investment managers of mutual and pooled funds, which gives us the ability to direct the investment 

decisions of the funds. We do not consolidate those mutual and pooled funds if we exercise our decision-making power as an 
agent on behalf of other unit holders. 

We use structured entities to generally transform credit derivatives into cash instruments, to distribute credit risk and to 

create customized credit products to meet investors’ specific requirements. We enter into derivative contracts, including credit 
derivatives, to purchase protection from these entities (credit protection) and convert various risk factors such as yield, currency 
or credit risk of underlying assets to meet the needs of the investors. We act as sole arranger and swap provider for certain 
entities and, in some cases, fulfill other administrative functions for the entities. We do not consolidate these credit investment 
product entities as we do not have decision-making power over the relevant activities, which include selection of the collateral 
and reference portfolio, and are not exposed to a majority of the benefits or risks of the entities. 

We created certain funds to pass through tax credits received from underlying low-income housing, historic rehabilitation 
real estate projects to third parties, new market tax credits or renewable energy tax credits to third parties (tax credit funds). We 
are sponsors of the tax credit funds as a result of our responsibility to manage the funds, arrange the financing, and perform the 
administrative duties of these tax credit funds. We do not consolidate the tax credit funds as the third-party investors in these 
funds have the decision-making power to select the underlying investments and are exposed to the majority of the residual 
ownership and tax risks of the funds. 

We also purchase passive interests in renewable energy tax credit entities created and controlled by third parties. We do not 

consolidate these third-party funds as we do not have decision-making power over the relevant activities and our investments 
are managed as part of larger portfolios which are held for trading purposes. 

186

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Other interests in unconsolidated structured entities 
In the normal course of business, we buy and sell passive interests in certain third-party structured entities, including mutual 
funds, exchange traded funds, and government-sponsored ABS vehicles. Our investments in these entities are managed as part of 
larger portfolios which are held for trading, liquidity or hedging purposes. We did not create or sponsor these entities and do not 
have any decision-making power over their ongoing activities. Our maximum exposure to loss is limited to our on-balance sheet 
investments in these entities, which are not included in the table above. As at October 31, 2022 and 2021, our investments in these 
entities were included in Trading and Investment securities on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Refer to Note 3 and Note 4 for 
further details on our Trading and Investment securities. 

Sponsored entities 
We are a sponsor of certain structured entities in which we have interests but do not consolidate. In determining whether we are 
a sponsor of a structured entity, we consider both qualitative and quantitative factors, including the purpose and nature of the 
entity, our initial and continuing involvement and whether we hold subordinated interests in the entity. We are considered to be 
the sponsor of certain credit investment products, tax credit entities, RBC managed mutual funds and a commercial mortgage 
securitization vehicle. During the year ended October 31, 2022, we transferred commercial mortgages with a carrying amount of 
$450 million (October 31, 2021 – $nil) to a sponsored securitization vehicle in which we did not have any interests as at the end of 
the reporting period. 

Financial support provided to structured entities 
During the years ended October 31, 2022 and 2021, we have not provided any financial or non-financial support to any 
consolidated or unconsolidated structured entities when we were not contractually obligated to do so. Furthermore, we have no 
intention to provide such support in the future. 

Note 9 Derivative financial instruments and hedging activities  

Derivative instruments are categorized as either financial or non-financial derivatives. Financial derivatives are financial 
contracts whose value is derived from an underlying interest rate, foreign exchange rate, credit risk, and equity or equity index. 
Non-financial derivatives are contracts whose value is derived from a precious metal, commodity instrument or index. The 
notional amount of derivatives represents the contract amount used as a reference point to calculate payments. Notional 
amounts are generally not exchanged by counterparties, and do not reflect our EAD. 

Financial derivatives 
Forwards and futures 
Forward contracts are non-standardized agreements that are transacted between counterparties in the OTC market, whereas 
futures are standardized contracts with respect to amounts and settlement dates, and are traded on regular futures exchanges. 
Examples of forwards and futures are described below. 

Interest rate forwards (forward rate agreements) and futures are contractual obligations to buy or sell an interest-rate 

sensitive financial instrument on a predetermined future date at a specified price. 

Foreign exchange forwards and futures are contractual obligations to exchange one currency for another at a specified price 

for settlement at a predetermined future date. 

Equity forwards and futures are contractual obligations to buy or sell at a fixed value (the specified price) of an equity index, 

a basket of stocks or a single stock at a predetermined future date. 

Swaps 
Swaps are OTC contracts in which two counterparties exchange a series of cash flows based on agreed upon rates applied to a 
notional amount. Examples of swap agreements are described below. 

Interest rate swaps are agreements where two counterparties exchange a series of payments based on different interest 

rates applied to a notional amount in a single currency. Certain interest rate swaps are transacted and settled through clearing 
houses which act as central counterparties. Cross currency swaps involve the exchange of fixed payments in one currency for the 
receipt of fixed payments in another currency. Cross currency interest rate swaps involve the exchange of both interest and 
notional amounts in two different currencies. 

Equity swaps are contracts in which one counterparty agrees to pay or receive from the other cash flows based on changes 

in the value of an equity index, a basket of stocks or a single stock. 

Options 
Options are contractual agreements under which the seller (writer) grants the purchaser the right, but not the obligation, either 
to buy (call option) or sell (put option) a security, exchange rate, interest rate, or other financial instrument or commodity at a 
specified price, at or by a predetermined future date. The seller (writer) of an option can also settle the contract by paying the 
cash settlement value of the purchaser’s right. The seller (writer) receives a premium from the purchaser for this right. The 
various option agreements that we enter into include but are not limited to interest rate options, foreign currency options, equity 
options and index options. 

Credit derivatives 
Credit derivatives are OTC contracts that transfer credit risk related to an underlying financial instrument (referenced asset) 
from one counterparty to another. Credit derivatives include credit default swaps, credit default baskets and total return swaps. 

Credit default swaps provide protection against the decline in the value of the referenced asset as a result of specified credit 

events such as default or bankruptcy. They are similar in structure to an option, whereby the purchaser pays a premium to the 
seller of the credit default swap in return for payment contingent on a credit event affecting the referenced asset. 

Credit default baskets are similar to credit default swaps except that the underlying referenced financial instrument is a 

group of assets instead of a single asset. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

187 

Note 9 Derivative financial instruments and hedging activities (continued)  

Total return swaps are contracts where one counterparty agrees to pay or receive from the other cash amounts based on 
changes in the value of a referenced asset or group of assets, including any returns such as interest earned on these assets, in 
exchange for amounts that are based on prevailing market funding rates. 

Other derivative products 
Other contracts are stable value and equity derivative contracts. 

Non-financial derivatives 
Other contracts also include non-financial derivative products such as precious metal and commodity derivative contracts in 
both the OTC and exchange markets. 

Derivatives issued for trading purposes 
Most of our derivative transactions relate to client-driven sales and trading activities, and associated market risk hedging. Sales 
activities include the structuring and marketing of derivative products to clients, enabling them to modify or reduce risks. Trading 
involves market-making, positioning and arbitrage activities. Market-making involves quoting bid and offer prices to other 
market participants with the intention of generating revenue based on spread and volume. Positioning involves the active 
management of derivative transactions with the expectation of profiting from favourable movements in prices, rates, or indices. 
Arbitrage activities involve identifying and profiting from price differentials between markets and product types. Any realized and 
unrealized gains or losses on derivatives used for trading purposes are recognized immediately in Non-interest income – Trading 
revenue. 

Derivatives issued for other-than-trading purposes 
We also use derivatives for purposes other than trading, primarily for hedging, in conjunction with the management of interest 
rate, credit, equity and foreign exchange risk related to our funding, lending, investment activities and asset/liability 
management. 

Interest rate swaps are used to manage our exposure to interest rate risk by modifying the repricing or maturity 

characteristics of existing and/or forecasted assets and liabilities, including funding and investment activities. Purchased options 
are used to hedge redeemable deposits and other options embedded in consumer products. We manage our exposure to foreign 
currency risk with cross currency swaps and foreign exchange forward contracts. We predominantly use credit derivatives to 
manage our credit exposures. We mitigate industry sector concentrations and single-name exposures related to our credit 
portfolio by purchasing credit derivatives to transfer credit risk to third parties. 

Certain derivatives and cash instruments are specifically designated and qualify for hedge accounting. From time to time, we 

also enter into derivative transactions to economically hedge certain exposures that do not otherwise qualify for hedge 
accounting, or where hedge accounting is not considered economically feasible to implement. In such circumstances, changes in 
fair value are reflected in Other income in Non-interest income. 

Notional amount of derivatives by term to maturity (absolute amounts) (1) 

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Over-the-counter contracts  
Interest rate contracts  

Forward rate agreements  
Swaps  
Options purchased  
Options written  

Foreign exchange contracts  

Forward contracts  
Cross currency swaps  
Cross currency interest rate swaps  
Options purchased  
Options written  
Credit derivatives (2)  
Other contracts (3)  

Exchange-traded contracts  
Interest rate contracts  

Futures – long positions  
Futures – short positions  
Options purchased  
Options written  

Foreign exchange contracts  
Futures – long positions  

Other contracts  

As at October 31, 2022  

Term to maturity  

  

  

Within  
1 year  

1 through  
5 years  

Over  
5 years  

Total  

Trading  

Other than  
Trading  

  
  

$

763,398   $

4,994,006  
100,504  
108,770  
  
2,187,124  
87,942  
518,244  
58,075  
62,266  
1,143  
228,709  
  
  
148,032  
233,941  
56,353  
16,394  
  
164  
539,103  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

353   $

44,188   $

806,576   $

807,939   $

  
  
1,363  
6,934,996   4,781,148   16,710,150   16,001,414   708,736  
–  
–  
  
45,007  
4,329  
52,212  
–  
–  
730  
13,672  
  
  
1,650  
449  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  

829,368  
848,263  
  
2,275,908  
237,946  
2,970,275  
79,335  
82,163  
43,515  
341,532  
  
  
198,901  
332,769  
68,526  
22,562  
  
164  
630,344  

829,368  
848,263  
  
2,230,901  
233,617  
2,918,063  
79,335  
82,163  
42,785  
327,860  
  
  
197,251  
332,320  
68,526  
22,562  
  
164  
630,344  

577,780  
556,652  
  
86,136  
67,345  
1,572,490  
18,061  
16,623  
35,621  
93,431  
  
  
50,869  
98,763  
12,173  
6,168  
  
–  
89,147  

151,084  
182,841  
  
2,648  
82,659  
879,541  
3,199  
3,274  
6,751  
19,392  
  
  
–  
65  
–  
–  
  
–  
2,094  

$10,104,168   $10,260,443   $6,115,049   $26,479,660   $25,651,512   $ 828,148  

188

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

  

(1) 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

(1) 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Over-the-counter contracts  
Interest rate contracts  

Forward rate agreements  
Swaps  
Options purchased  
Options written  

Foreign exchange contracts  

Forward contracts  
Cross currency swaps  
Cross currency interest rate swaps  
Options purchased  
Options written  
Credit derivatives (2)  
Other contracts (3)  

Exchange-traded contracts  
Interest rate contracts  

Futures – long positions  
Futures – short positions  
Options purchased  
Options written  

Foreign exchange contracts  
Futures – long positions  

Other contracts  

As at October 31, 2021  

Term to maturity  

  

  

Within  
1 year  

1 through  
5 years  

Over  
5 years  

Total  

Trading  

Other than  
Trading  

  
  

  
  

  
  
158   $

  
  

  
  

$

866,704   $

161,835   $

1,028,697   $

1,015,263   $

3,936,638  
266,798  
271,000  
  
1,730,712  
82,316  
439,169  
46,060  
53,342  
1,027  
218,270  
  
  
110,285  
173,039  
28,071  
22,272  
  
129  
391,339  

6,559,032  
312,149  
309,540  
  
56,335  
57,968  
1,193,669  
16,097  
16,122  
35,759  
98,850  
  
  
148,262  
97,364  
15,250  
1,300  
  
–  
84,135  

4,268,243  
185,547  
203,665  
  
2,491  
72,864  
776,062  
3,059  
3,060  
6,125  
20,757  
  
  
333  
126  
–  
–  
  
–  
1,175  

14,763,913  
764,494  
784,205  
  
1,789,538  
213,148  
2,408,900  
65,216  
72,524  
42,911  
337,877  
  
  
258,880  
270,529  
43,321  
23,572  
  
129  
476,649  

14,259,757  
764,494  
784,205  
  
1,753,075  
204,789  
2,376,225  
65,216  
72,524  
42,428  
325,226  
  
  
256,020  
270,129  
43,321  
23,572  
  
129  
476,649  

  
  
13,434  
504,156  
–  
–  
  
36,463  
8,359  
32,675  
–  
–  
483  
12,651  
  
  
2,860  
400  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  

$ 8,637,171   $ 9,163,667   $ 5,543,665   $ 23,344,503   $ 22,733,022   $ 611,481  

The derivative notional amounts are determined using the standardized approach for measuring counterparty credit risk (SA-CCR) in accordance with the Capital 
Adequacy Requirements (CAR). 

(2)  Credit derivatives with a notional value of $1 billion (October 31, 2021 – $1 billion) are economic hedges. Trading credit derivatives comprise protection purchased of 

$26 billion (October 31, 2021 – $25 billion) and protection sold of $17 billion (October 31, 2021 – $17 billion). 

(3)  Other contracts exclude loan underwriting commitments of $6 billion (October 31, 2021 – $9 billion), which are not classified as derivatives under CAR guidelines. 

Fair value of derivative instruments (1) 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Held or issued for trading purposes  

Interest rate contracts  

Forward rate agreements  
Swaps  
Options purchased  
Options written  

Foreign exchange contracts  

Forward contracts  
Cross currency swaps  
Cross currency interest rate swaps  
Options purchased  
Options written  

Credit derivatives  
Other contracts  

  
Held or issued for other-than-trading purposes  

Interest rate contracts  

Swaps  

Foreign exchange contracts  

Forward contracts  
Cross currency swaps  
Cross currency interest rate swaps  

Credit derivatives  
Other contracts  

  
Total gross fair values before:  

As at  

October 31, 2022  

  

October 31, 2021  

$

Positive  
  
  
10   $

Positive  
  
  
77   $

Negative     
     
     
25     $

Negative  
  
  
11  
23,136  
–  
5,258  
28,405  
  
11,515  
4,929  
22,382  
–  
978  
39,804  
115  
21,253  
89,577  
  
  
1,116  
1,116  
  
260  
–  
447  
707  
5  
321  
2,149  
91,726  
27  
(314)  
$ 154,439   $ 153,491     $ 95,541   $ 91,439  

21,608     
–     
12,201     
33,834     
     
37,631     
9,087     
38,230     
–     
2,571     
87,519     
125     
21,084     
142,562     
     
     
6,880     
6,880     
     
237     
22     
6,677     
6,936     
–     
273     
14,089     
156,651     
(975)    
(2,185)    

25,690  
12,056  
–  
37,823  
  
37,734  
8,680  
49,758  
2,623  
–  
98,795  
388  
18,474  
155,480  
  
  
2,244  
2,244  
  
268  
–  
374  
642  
–  
313  
3,199  
158,679  
(2,055)  
(2,185)  

28,400  
4,580  
–  
32,990  
  
11,404  
4,469  
23,208  
1,021  
–  
40,102  
34  
20,827  
93,953  
  
  
1,187  
1,187  
  
305  
32  
859  
1,196  
–  
329  
2,712  
96,665  
(810)  
(314)  

Valuation adjustments determined on a pooled basis  
Impact of netting agreements that qualify for balance sheet offset  

The fair value reflects the impact of the election to characterize the daily variation margin as settlement of the related derivative fair values as permitted by certain 
central counterparties. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

189 

Note 9 Derivative financial instruments and hedging activities (continued)  

Fair value of derivative instruments by term to maturity (1) 

October 31, 2022  

Less than  
1 year  

1 through  
5 years  

Over  
5 years  

As at  

  

October 31, 2021  

Less than  
1 year  

1 through  
5 years  

Over  
5 years  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Derivative assets  
Derivative liabilities  

Total     
Total  
$ 56,050   56,792   41,597   $ 154,439    $ 27,771   28,029   39,741   $ 95,541  
91,439  

26,766   27,938   36,735  

58,504   54,361   40,626  

153,491    

(1) 

The fair value reflects the impact of the election to characterize the daily variation margin as settlement of the related derivative fair values as permitted by certain 
central counterparties. 

Interest rate benchmark reform (1) 
We use interest rate contracts in fair value hedges and cash flow hedges to manage our exposure to interest rate risk of our 
existing and/or forecast assets and liabilities. We also use foreign denominated deposit liabilities in net investment hedges to 
manage the foreign exchange risk arising from our investments in foreign operations. The hedging instruments designated to 
manage these risks reference IBORs in multiple jurisdictions and will be affected by the Reform as the markets transition to ABRs 
as discussed in Note 2. 

The following table presents the notional or principal amount of our hedging instruments which reference IBORs that will be 
affected by the Reform as discussed in Note 2. The notional or principal amounts of our hedging instruments also approximates 
the extent of the risk exposure we manage through hedging relationships: 

  

  

  

  

  

(1) 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Interest rate contracts  

USD LIBOR  
GBP LIBOR  
CDOR  

Total Return Swaps  

CDOR  

Non-derivative instruments  

USD LIBOR  

$

40,208      $

As at

  

October 31, 2022  

  

October 31, 2021  

Notional/Principal  

amounts     
     

–     
114,159     
     
801     
     
237     

Notional/Principal  
amounts  
  
38,730  
290  
76,931  
  
390  
  
215  

$

155,405      $

116,556  

Excludes interest rate contracts and non-derivative instruments which reference rates in multi-rate jurisdictions, including EURO Interbank Offered Rate and Australian 
Bank Bill Swap Rate (BBSW). 

Derivative-related credit risk 
Credit risk from derivative transactions is generated by the potential for the counterparty to default on its contractual 
obligations when one or more transactions have a positive market value to us. Therefore, derivative-related credit risk is 
represented by the positive fair value of the instrument and is normally a small fraction of the contract’s notional amount. 

We subject our derivative transactions to the same credit approval, limit and monitoring standards that we use for managing 

other transactions that create credit exposure. This includes evaluating the creditworthiness of counterparties, and managing 
the size, diversification and maturity structure of the portfolio. Credit utilization for all products is compared with established 
limits on a continual basis and is subject to a standard exception reporting process. We use a single internal rating system for all 
credit risk exposure, as outlined in the internal ratings maps in the Credit risk section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis. 
Offsetting is a technique that can reduce credit exposure from derivatives and is generally facilitated through the use of 
master netting agreements and achieved when specific criteria are met in accordance with our accounting policy in Note 2. A 
master netting agreement provides for a single net settlement of all financial instruments covered by the agreement in the event 
of default. However, credit risk is reduced only to the extent that our financial obligations to the same counterparty can be set off 
against obligations of the counterparty to us. We maximize the use of master netting agreements to reduce derivative-related 
credit exposure. Our overall exposure to credit risk that is reduced through master netting agreements may change substantially 
following the reporting date as the exposure is affected by each transaction subject to the agreement as well as by changes in 
underlying market rates. Measurement of our credit exposure arising out of derivative transactions is reduced to reflect the 
effects of netting in cases where the enforceability of that netting is supported by appropriate legal analysis as documented in 
our trading credit risk policies. 

The use of collateral is another significant credit mitigation technique for managing derivative-related counterparty credit 

risk. Mark-to-market provisions in our agreements with some counterparties, typically in the form of a Credit Support Annex, 
provide us with the right to request that the counterparty pay down or collateralize the current market value of its derivatives 
positions when the value exceeds a specified threshold amount. 

Replacement cost and credit equivalent amounts are determined in accordance with OSFI’s non-modelled regulatory SA-CCR 
under the CAR guidelines. The replacement cost represents the total fair value of all outstanding contracts in a gain position after 
factoring in the master netting agreements and applicable margins, scaled by a regulatory factor. The credit equivalent amount 
is defined as the replacement cost plus an additional amount for potential future credit exposure also scaled by a regulatory 
factor. The risk-weighted equivalent is determined by applying appropriate risk-weights to the credit equivalent amount, 
including those risk weights reflective of model approval under the internal ratings based approach. 

190

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

  

  

  

  
  

  
  
  

Derivative-related credit risk (1) 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Over-the-counter contracts  
Interest rate contracts  

Forward rate agreements  
Swaps  
Options purchased  
Options written  

Foreign exchange contracts  

Forward contracts  
Swaps  
Options purchased  
Options written  
Credit derivatives  
Other contracts  

Exchange-traded contracts  

As at   

  

October 31, 2022  

October 31, 2021  

Replacement  
cost  
  
  
46   $

$

Credit  
equivalent  
amount  
  
  
76   $

Risk-weighted  
equivalent (2)     
     
     
5      $

Replacement  
cost  
  
  

9   $

Credit  
equivalent  
amount  
  
  
64   $

9,699  
108  
15  
  
8,772  
6,072  
536  
28  
299  
5,196  
11,098  

21,698  
426  
543  
  
29,565  
22,188  
1,111  
313  
766  
20,457  
19,870  

5,187     
119     
164     
     
5,940     
4,556     
340     
86     
114     
7,520     
397     

4,519  
113  
23  
  
3,085  
2,621  
177  
2  
913  
7,668  
1,814  

16,203  
403  
415  
  
19,097  
16,484  
510  
196  
2,234  
26,567  
6,218  

Risk-weighted  
equivalent (2)  
  
  
20  
4,569  
187  
141  
  
4,232  
4,092  
145  
43  
213  
10,480  
124  

$ 41,869   $117,013   $ 24,428      $ 20,944   $ 88,391   $ 24,246  

(1) 
(2) 

The amounts presented are net of master netting agreements in accordance with CAR guidelines. 
The risk-weighted balances are calculated in accordance with CAR guidelines and exclude CVA of $16 billion (October 31, 2021 – $18 billion). 

Replacement cost of derivative instruments by risk rating and by counterparty type 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Gross positive fair values  
Impact of master netting agreements and  

applicable margins  

Replacement cost (after netting  

agreements)  

Risk rating (1)  

As at October 31, 2022  

Counterparty type (2)  

OECD  
governments  

AAA, AA  

A  

BBB   BB or lower  

$ 39,001   $ 72,983   $ 29,690   $

Total  
17,005   $ 158,679   $ 73,616   $

Banks  

Total  
Other  
22,727   $ 62,336   $ 158,679  

21,552  

62,614  

21,818  

10,826  

116,810  

71,582  

22,597  

22,631  

116,810  

$ 17,449   $ 10,369   $ 7,872   $

6,179   $ 41,869   $ 2,034   $

130   $ 39,705   $ 41,869  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Risk rating (1)  

As at October 31, 2021  

Counterparty type (2)  

OECD  
governments  

  

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

AAA, AA  

A  

BBB   BB or lower  

Total  

Banks  

Other  

Total  

$ 22,801   $ 37,938   $ 16,333   $

19,593   $

96,665   $ 42,361   $

15,964   $ 38,340   $

96,665  

applicable margins  

20,545  

33,257  

12,050  

9,869  

75,721  

41,554  

15,731  

18,436  

75,721  

Gross positive fair values  
Impact of master netting agreements and  

Replacement cost (after netting  

agreements)  

(1)  Our internal risk ratings of AAA, AA, A and BBB represent investment grade ratings and ratings of BB or lower represent non-investment grade ratings, as outlined in the 

internal ratings maps in the Credit risk section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis. 

(2)  Counterparty type is defined in accordance with CAR guidelines. 

$

2,256   $

4,681   $

4,283   $

9,724   $

20,944   $

807   $

233   $ 19,904   $

20,944  

Derivatives in hedging relationships 
We apply hedge accounting to minimize volatility in earnings and capital caused by changes in interest rates or foreign exchange 
rates. Interest rate and currency fluctuations will either cause assets and liabilities to appreciate or depreciate in market value 
or cause variability in forecasted cash flows. When a hedging relationship is effective, gains, losses, revenue and expenses of the 
hedging instrument will offset the gains, losses, revenue and expenses of the hedged item. 

Derivatives used in hedging relationships are recorded in Other Assets – Derivatives or Other Liabilities – Derivatives on the 
Balance Sheet. Foreign currency-denominated liabilities used in net investment hedging relationships are recorded in Deposits – 
Business and Government and Subordinated debentures on the Balance Sheet. Gains and losses relating to hedging 
ineffectiveness is recorded in Non-Interest income and amounts reclassified from hedge reserves in OCI to income is recorded in 
Net-interest income for cash flow hedges and Non-interest income for net Investment hedges. 

We assess and measure the effectiveness of a hedging relationship based on the change in the fair value or cash flows of the 
derivative hedging instrument relative to the change in the fair value or cash flows of the hedged item attributable to the hedged 
risk. When cash instruments are designated as hedges of foreign exchange risks, only changes in their value due to foreign 
exchange risk are included in the assessment and measurement of hedge effectiveness. 
Potential sources of ineffectiveness can be attributed to differences between hedging instruments and hedged items: 

(cid:129) Mismatches in the terms of hedged items and hedging instruments, for example the frequency and timing of when 

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

interest rates are reset and frequency of payment. 
Difference in the discounting factors between the hedged item and the hedging instrument, taking into consideration the 
different reset frequency of the hedged item and hedging instrument. 
Hedging derivatives with a non-zero fair value at inception date of the hedging relationship, resulting in mismatch in 
terms with the hedged item. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

191 

Note 9 Derivative financial instruments and hedging activities (continued)  

Below is a description of our risk management strategy for each risk exposure that we decide to hedge: 

Interest rate risk 
We use interest rate contracts to manage our exposure to interest rate risk by modifying the repricing characteristics of existing 
and/or forecasted assets and liabilities, including funding and investment activities. The swaps are designated in either a fair 
value hedge or a cash flow hedge and predominantly reference IBORs across multiple jurisdictions. Certain swaps will be 
affected by the Reform as the market transitions to ABRs.  

For fair value hedges, we use interest rate contracts to manage the fair value movements of our fixed-rate instruments due 

to changes in benchmark interest. The interest rate swaps are entered into on a one-to-one basis to manage the benchmark 
interest rate risk, and its terms are critically matched to the specified fixed rate instruments. 

We also use interest rate swaps in fair value hedges to manage interest rate risk from residential mortgage assets and 
funding liabilities. Our exposure from this portfolio changes with the origination of new loans, repayments of existing loans, and 
sale of securitized mortgages. Accordingly, we have adopted dynamic hedging for that portfolio, in which the hedge relationship 
is rebalanced on a more frequent basis, such as on a bi-weekly or on a monthly basis. 

For cash flow hedges, we use interest rate swaps to manage the exposure to cash flow variability of our variable rate 
instruments as a result of changes in benchmark interest rates. The variable rate instruments and forecast transactions which 
reference certain IBORs will be affected by the Reform. Whilst some of the interest rate derivatives are entered into on a 
one-to-one basis to manage a specific exposure, other interest rate derivatives may be entered into for managing interest rate 
risks of a portfolio of assets and liabilities. 

Foreign exchange risk 
We manage our exposure to foreign currency risk with cross currency swaps in a cash flow hedge, and foreign exchange forward 
contracts in a net investment hedge. Certain cash instruments may also be designated in a net investment hedge, where 
applicable. 

For cash flow hedges, we use cross currency swaps and forward contracts to manage the cash flow variability arising from 

fluctuations in foreign exchange rates on our issued foreign denominated fixed rate liabilities and highly probable forecasted 
transactions. The maturity profile and repayment terms of these swaps are matched to those of our foreign denominated 
exposures to limit our cash flow volatility from changes in foreign exchange rates. 

For net investment hedges, we use a combination of foreign exchange forwards and cash instruments, such as foreign 
denominated deposit liabilities, some of which reference IBORs that will be affected by the Reform, to manage our foreign 
exchange risk arising from our investments in foreign operations. Our most significant exposures include USD, GBP and Euro. 
When hedging net investments in foreign operations using foreign exchange forwards, only the undiscounted spot element of the 
foreign exchange forward is designated as the hedging instrument. Accordingly, changes in the fair value of the hedging 
instrument as a result of changes in forward rates and the effects of discounting are not included in the hedging effectiveness 
assessment. Foreign operations are only hedged to the extent of the principal of the foreign denominated deposit liabilities or 
notional amount of the derivative; we generally do not expect to incur significant ineffectiveness on hedges of net investments in 
foreign operations. 

Equity price risk 
We use total return swaps in cash flow hedges to mitigate the cash flow variability of the expected payment associated with our 
cash settled share-based compensation plan for certain key employees by exchanging interest payments for indexed RBC share 
price change and dividend returns. 

Credit risk 
We predominantly use credit derivatives to economically hedge our credit exposures. We mitigate industry sector concentrations 
and single-name exposures related to our credit portfolio by purchasing credit derivatives to transfer credit risk to third parties. 

Derivative instruments designated in hedging relationships 
The following table presents the fair values of the derivative instruments and the principal amounts of the non-derivative 
liabilities, categorized by their hedging relationships, as well as derivatives that are not designated in hedging relationships. 

Derivatives and non-derivative instruments (1) 

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Assets  

Liabilities  

Derivative instruments  

Derivative instruments  
Non-derivative instruments  

n.a.  not applicable 

October 31, 2022  

Designated as hedging instruments  
in hedging relationships  

$ 247   $

Fair value   Cash flow  
  
  
57   $
  
–  
–  

  
27  
–  

Net  
investment  
  

  
126  
25,798  

Not designated  
in a hedging  
relationship  

36   $ 154,099    $

    
153,338    
n.a.    

As at   

  

  
  

October 31, 2021  

Designated as hedging instruments  
in hedging relationships  

    

   Fair value   Cash flow  
  
  
9   $
66   $
  
  
20  
131  
–  

Net  
investment  
  
98   $
  
18  
–   27,157  

Not designated  
in a hedging  
relationship  
  
95,368  
  
91,270  
n.a.  

(1) 

The fair value reflects the impact of the election to characterize the daily variation margin as settlement of the related derivative fair values as permitted by certain 
central counterparties. 

192

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

The following tables provide the remaining term to maturity analysis of the notional amounts and the weighted average rates of 
the hedging instruments and their carrying amounts by types of hedging relationships: 

Fair value hedges 

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except average rates)  

Interest rate risk  
Interest rate contracts  

Hedge of fixed rate assets  
Hedge of fixed rate liabilities  

Weighted average fixed interest rate  

Hedge of fixed rate assets  
Hedge of fixed rate liabilities  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except average rates)  
Interest rate risk  
Interest rate contracts  

Hedge of fixed rate assets  
Hedge of fixed rate liabilities  

Weighted average fixed interest rate  

Hedge of fixed rate assets  
Hedge of fixed rate liabilities  

Cash flow hedges 

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except average rates)  

Interest rate risk  
Interest rate contracts  

Hedge of variable rate assets  
Hedge of variable rate liabilities  
Weighted average fixed interest rate  

Hedge of variable rate assets  
Hedge of variable rate liabilities  

  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  

  
  

As at October 31, 2022  

Notional amounts  

  

Carrying amount (1)  

Within  
1 year  
  
  

1 through  
5 years  
  
  

Over  
5 years  
  
  

Total     
     
     

Assets  
  
  

$ 9,083   $ 32,173   $ 15,516   $ 56,772      $ 247   $
10,094  
  
2.8%  
2.0%  

92,744     
     
2.3%     
1.9%     

69,419  
  
2.5%  
1.8%  

13,231  
  
1.1%  
1.9%  

–  
  
  
  

Liabilities  
  
  
3  
24  
  
  
  

  

Within  
1 year  
  
  

8,939  
  
0.8%  
1.5%  

  

  
As at October 31, 2021  

     

  

  

Notional amounts  

  

Carrying amount (1)  

1 through  
5 years  
  
  

44,870  
  
0.7%  
1.2%  

Over  
5 years  
  
  

11,646  
  
1.9%  
1.5%  

Total     
     
     

65,455     
     
0.9%     
1.3%     

Assets  
  
  
19   $
47  
  
  
  

Liabilities  
  
  
116  
15  
  
  
  

$ 10,503   $ 25,008   $

6,568   $ 42,079      $

As at October 31, 2022  

Notional amounts  

  

Carrying amount (1)  

$ 50,436   $ 74,726   $ 1,023   $ 126,185      $

1 through  
5 years  
  
  

42,830  
  
2.8%  
1.5%  

Over  
5 years  
  
  

24,024  
  
2.5%  
2.0%  

Total     
     
     

Assets  
  
  

73,075     
     
3.0%     
1.7%     

(1) 

The carrying value reflects the impact of the election to characterize the daily variation margin as settlement of the related derivative fair values as permitted by certain 
central counterparties. 

Foreign exchange risk  
Cross currency swaps  

Weighted average CAD-EUR exchange rate  

$

–   $

n.a.  

  
314   $
1.44  

  

–   $

n.a.  

     
314      $
1.44     

  
32   $
  

  

  
As at October 31, 2021  

     

  

Notional amounts  

  

Carrying amount (1)  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except average rates)  
Interest rate risk  
Interest rate contracts  

Hedge of variable rate assets  
Hedge of variable rate liabilities  
Weighted average fixed interest rate  

Hedge of variable rate assets  
Hedge of variable rate liabilities  

$ 57,304   $ 28,707   $

1 through  
5 years  
  
  

55,556  
  
1.0%  
1.2%  

Over  
5 years  
  
  
4,112   $

13,784  
  
1.2%  
1.5%  

Foreign exchange risk  
Cross currency swaps  

Weighted average CAD-EUR exchange rate  

$

  

–   $

n.a.  

  
183   $
1.52  

  

–   $

n.a.  

Total     
     
     

Assets  
  
  

90,123      $
85,999     
     
0.7%     
1.2%     

     
183      $
1.52     

(1) 

The carrying value reflects the impact of the election to characterize the daily variation margin as settlement of the related derivative fair values as permitted by certain 
central counterparties. 

n.a.  not applicable 

Liabilities  
  
  
–  
–  
  
  
  

–   $
–  
  
  
  

  
–  
  

  

Liabilities  
  
  
–  
–  
  
  
  

  
–  
  

–   $
–  
  
  
  

9   $

  

  

Within  
1 year  
  
  

6,221  
  
3.3%  
2.0%  

  

  

Within  
1 year  
  
  

16,659  
  
0.5%  
0.8%  

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

193 

Note 9 Derivative financial instruments and hedging activities (continued)  

  

  
  

  
  

  

  

  

  

Net investment hedges 

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except average rates)  

Foreign exchange risk  
Foreign currency liabilities  

Weighted average CAD-USD exchange rate  
Weighted average CAD-EUR exchange rate  
Weighted average CAD-GBP exchange rate  

Forward contracts  

Weighted average CAD-USD exchange rate  
Weighted average CAD-EUR exchange rate  
Weighted average CAD-GBP exchange rate  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except average rates)  

Foreign exchange risk  
Foreign currency liabilities  

Weighted average CAD-USD exchange rate  
Weighted average CAD-EUR exchange rate  
Weighted average CAD-GBP exchange rate  

Forward contracts  

Weighted average CAD-USD exchange rate  
Weighted average CAD-EUR exchange rate  
Weighted average CAD-GBP exchange rate  

n.a.  not applicable 

As at October 31, 2022  

Notional/Principal  

  

Carrying amount  

Over  
5 years  
  

Within  
1 year  
  

1 through  
5 years  
  

Total     
    
$ 5,462   $ 20,851   $ 1,025   $ 27,338    
1.29    
1.51    
1.71    

1.28  
1.51  
1.71  

1.31  
–  
–  

1.28  
1.48  
–  
–   $ 6,089     $ 36   $

–   $

$ 6,089   $
1.34  
1.36  
1.55  

  

n.a.  
n.a.  
n.a.  

  

n.a.  
n.a.  
n.a.  

  

1.34    
1.36    
1.55    

Assets  
  

  
  
  

Liabilities  
  
n.a.   $ 25,798  
  
  
  
126  
  
  
  

  
  
  

As at October 31, 2021  

Notional/Principal  

  

Carrying amount  

    

  

  

Within  
1 year  
  

1 through  
5 years  
  

Over  
5 years  
  

$

433   $ 26,294   $
1.32  
–  
–  

1.29  
1.51  
1.72  

$ 4,951   $
1.26  
1.45  
1.73  

–   $

n.a.  
n.a.  
n.a.  

Total     
    
401   $ 27,128    
1.29    
1.30  
1.51    
1.48  
1.72    
–  
4,951     $
–   $
1.26    
1.45    
1.73    

n.a.  
n.a.  
n.a.  

Assets  
  

Liabilities  
  
n.a.   $ 27,157  
  
  
  
18  
  
  
  

  
  
  
98   $
  
  
  

The following tables present the details of the hedged items categorized by their hedging relationships: 

Fair value hedges – assets and liabilities designated as hedged items 

As at and for the year ended October 31, 2022  

Accumulated amount of fair  
value adjustments on the  
hedged item included in the  
carrying amount  

Carrying amount  

  

  

Changes in fair  
values used for  
calculating hedge  
ineffectiveness  
  

Changes in fair  
values used for  
calculating hedge  
ineffectiveness  
  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Interest rate risk  

Fixed rate assets (1)  

Fixed rate liabilities (1)  

Assets   Liabilities  
  

  

Assets   Liabilities  
  

  

Balance sheet items:  
  
Securities – Investment, net of  
applicable allowance; Loans – Retail;  

$52,216   $

–   $ (3,285)  $

–  

Loans – Wholesale   $

(3,695)  

–   86,738  

–  

(5,924)  

Deposits – Business and government;  
Subordinated debentures  
Deposits – Bank  

5,742  

As at and for the year ended October 31, 2021  

Accumulated amount of fair  
value adjustments on the  
hedged item included in the  
carrying amount  

Carrying amount  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Interest rate risk  

Fixed rate assets (1)  

Assets   Liabilities  
  

  

Assets   Liabilities  
  

  

Balance sheet items:  
  
Securities – Investment, net of  
applicable allowance; Loans – Retail;  

Fixed rate liabilities (1)  

$ 42,810   $

–   $

(78)  $

–  

Loans – Wholesale   $

(1,027)  

–   65,355  

–  

(59)  

Deposits – Business and government;  
Subordinated debentures  

1,842  

(1) 

As at October 31, 2022, the accumulated amount of fair value hedge adjustments remaining in the Balance Sheet for hedged items that have ceased to be adjusted for 
hedging gains and losses is a loss of $486 million for fixed-rate assets and a loss of $25 million for fixed-rate liabilities (October 31, 2021 – gain of $125 million and loss of 
$62 million, respectively). 

194

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Cash flow hedges  
Interest rate risk  

Variable rate assets  

  
  
  
Variable rate liabilities  

  
  

Foreign exchange risk  
Fixed rate assets  

Net investment hedges  
Foreign exchange risk  
Foreign subsidiaries  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Cash flow hedges  
Interest rate risk  

Variable rate assets  

Variable rate liabilities  

Foreign exchange risk  
Fixed rate assets  

Net investment hedges  
Foreign exchange risk  
Foreign subsidiaries  

n.a.  not applicable 

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Fair value hedges  
Interest rate risk  

Cash flow hedges  
Interest rate risk  

Cash flow and net investment hedges – assets and liabilities designated as hedged items 

Balance sheet items:  

  
  
Securities – Investment, net of  

Changes in fair  
values used for  
calculating hedge  
ineffectiveness  
  
  

Cash flow hedge/foreign  
currency translation reserve  

Continuing hedges  
  
  

Discontinued  
hedges  
  
  

applicable allowance; Loans – Retail;   $
Interest bearing deposits with banks;  
Asset purchased under reverse  
repurchase agreements and securities borrowed  
Deposits – Business and government;  
Deposits – Personal;  
Obligations related to assets sold under  
repurchase agreements and securities loaned  
  
Securities – Investment, net of  
applicable allowance  
  
  
n.a.  

$

4,720  
  
  
  

(1,777)   $ (2,668)  
  
  
  

  
  
  

(6,895)  
  
  
  

(17)  
  
  
1,927  

5,471  
  
  
  

7  
  
  
(5,936)  

2,231  
  
  
  

–  
  
  
(421)  

Balance sheet items:  

  
  
Securities – Investment, net of  

applicable allowance; Loans – Retail   $
Deposits – Business and government;  
Deposits – Personal  
  
Securities – Investment, net of  
applicable allowance; Loans – Retail  
  
  
n.a.  

Changes in fair  
values used for  
calculating hedge  
ineffectiveness  
  
  

Cash flow hedge/foreign  
currency translation reserve  

Continuing hedges  
  
  

Discontinued  
hedges  
  
  

614  

$

(402)   $

206  

(2,641)  
  

(98)  
  
  
(2,331)  

1,310  
  

1  
  
  
(4,032)  

(399)  
  

–  
  
  
(421)  

Effectiveness of designated hedging relationships 

Interest rate contracts – fixed rate assets  
Interest rate contracts – fixed rate liabilities  

$

Interest rate contracts – variable rate assets  
Interest rate contracts – variable rate liabilities  

Foreign exchange risk  

Cross currency swap – fixed rate assets  

Net investment hedges  
Foreign exchange risk  

Foreign currency liabilities  
Forward contracts  

Change in fair value  
of hedging  
instrument  
  
  

For the year ended October 31, 2022  

Hedge  
ineffectiveness  
recognized in  
income (1)  
  
  
(45)  
29  
  
  
(36)   $
37  
  
–  
  
  
(3)  
–  

3,650   $
(5,713)  
  
  
(4,698)  
6,713  
  
17  
  
  
(1,771)  
(159)  

Changes in the value of  
the hedging instrument  
recognized in OCI  
  
  
n.a.  
n.a.  
  
  

Amount reclassified  
from hedge reserves  
to income  
  
  
n.a.  
n.a.  
  
  
(185)  
(118)  
  
17  
  
  
–  
(23)  

(4,432)   $
6,673  
  
23  
  
  
(1,768)  
(159)  

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

195 

Note 9 Derivative financial instruments and hedging activities (continued)  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Fair value hedges  
Interest rate risk  

Cash flow hedges  
Interest rate risk  

Interest rate contracts – fixed rate assets  
Interest rate contracts – fixed rate liabilities  

Interest rate contracts – variable rate assets  
Interest rate contracts – variable rate liabilities  

Foreign exchange risk  

Cross currency swap – fixed rate assets  

Net investment hedges  
Foreign exchange risk  

Foreign currency liabilities  
Forward contracts  

hedges (October 31, 2021 – $101 million). 

n.a.  not applicable 

Change in fair value  
of hedging  
instrument  
  
  
929   $

$

For the year ended October 31, 2021  

Hedge  
ineffectiveness  
recognized in  
income (1)  
  
  
(98)  
40  
  
  
(17)   $
9  
  
–  
  
  
–  
–  

Changes in the value of  
the hedging instrument  
recognized in OCI  
  
  
n.a.  
n.a.  
  
  
(497)   $
1,949  
  
98  
  
  
1,882  
449  

Amount reclassified  
from hedge reserves  
to income  
  
  
n.a.  
n.a.  
  
  
279  
(1,024)  
  
103  
  
  
–  
1  

(1,802)  
  
  
(631)  
2,579  
  
98  
  
  
1,882  
449  

(1)  Hedge ineffectiveness recognized in income included losses of $19 million that are excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness and are offset by economic 

Reconciliation of components of equity 
The following table provides a reconciliation by risk category of each component of equity and an analysis of other 
comprehensive income relating to hedge accounting: 

For the year ended October 31, 2022  

For the year ended October 31, 2021  

Cash flow hedge  
reserve  

Foreign currency  
translation reserve     

Cash flow hedge  
reserve  

2,055     $

(1,079)   $

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Balance at the beginning of the year  
Cash flow hedges  
Effective portion of changes in fair value:  

$

Interest rate risk  
Foreign exchange risk  
Equity price risk  

Net amount reclassified to profit or loss:  
Ongoing hedges:  

Interest rate risk  
Foreign exchange risk  
Equity price risk  

De-designated hedges:  
Interest rate risk  

Hedges of net investment in foreign  

operations  
Foreign exchange denominated debt  
Forward foreign exchange contracts  
Foreign currency translation differences  

for foreign operations  

Reclassification of losses (gains) on  

foreign currency translation to income  
Reclassification of losses (gains) on net  

investment hedging activities to income  
Tax on movements on reserves during the  

period  

Balance at the end of the year  

$

566   $
  
  
2,241  
23  
(1)  
  
  
(227)  
(17)  
(23)  
  
530  

  
  
  

  

  

  

  

     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     

     
(1,768)    
(159)    

5,085     

(18)    

23     

Foreign currency  
translation reserve  
4,632  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
1,452  
100  
306  
  
  
505  
(105)  
(271)  
  
240  

  
  
  

  

  

  

  
1,882  
449  

(4,308)  

(7)  

(1)  

(592)  

2,055  

(698)  

2,394   $

470     

5,688     $

(582)  

566   $

196

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Note 10 Premises and equipment  

  
  

  

  
  

For the year ended October 31, 2022  

Owned by the Bank (1)  

  Right-of-use lease assets  

  

Furniture,  
fixtures  
and other  
equipment  

Computer  
equipment  

Leasehold  
improvements  

Work in  
process     Buildings  

Equipment  

Total  

  

1,126  $
24  

  

773  $
3  

  

    

  

2,754  $
28  

170    $ 5,394  $
397    

270  

  

  
308  $ 11,978  
860  
138  

–  
15  
(83)  
24  
(3)  

  

664  $
48  
(80)  
11  
(16)  

627  $

4  
195  
(195)  
17  
(2)  

  

584  $
234  
(192)  
12  
2  

640  $

1  
49  
(5)  
15  
–  

  

427  $
94  
(4)  
6  
2  

525  $

6  
206  
(205)  
67  
(11)  

1    
(465)    
(1)    
6    
12    

55  
–  
(153)  
58  
124  

  

    

  

1,589  $
233  
(204)  
38  
–  

–    $ 1,133  $
–    
–    
–    
–    

569  
(106)  
2  
45  

–  
–  
(146)  
(1)  
–  

67  
–  
(798)  
193  
119  

  

  
157  $ 4,554  
1,265  
(732)  
68  
50  

87  
(146)  
(1)  
17  

1,656  $

–    $ 1,643  $

114  $ 5,205  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Land   Buildings  

Cost  
Balance at beginning of period   $ 145  $ 1,308  $
Additions  
Acquisition through business  

–  

–  

  

  

combination  

Transfers from work in process  
Disposals  
Foreign exchange translation  
Other  

–  
–  
(10)  
7  
(1)  

Accumulated depreciation  
Balance at beginning of period   $
Depreciation  
Disposals  
Foreign exchange translation  
Other  

Balance at end of period  

$

  
–  $
–  
–  
–  
–  

–  $

Net carrying amount at end of  

Balance at end of period  

$ 141  $ 1,261  $

1,169  $

836  $

2,845  $

120    $ 5,748  $

299  $ 12,419  

period  

$ 141  $

634  $

529  $

311  $

1,189  $

120    $ 4,105  $

185  $ 7,214  

  

For the year ended October 31, 2021  

Owned by the Bank (1), (2)  

  Right–of–use lease assets  

  

Furniture,  
fixtures  
and other  
equipment  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Land   Buildings  

Computer  
equipment  

Leasehold  
improvements  

Work in  
process     Buildings   Equipment (2)  

Total  

Cost  
Balance at beginning of period   $ 152  $
Additions  
Acquisition through business  

1  

  

combination  

Transfers from work in  

process  
Disposals  
Foreign exchange translation  
Other  

Accumulated depreciation  
Balance at beginning of period   $
Depreciation  
Disposals  
Foreign exchange translation  
Other  

Balance at end of period  

$

Net carrying amount at end of  

1,310  $

  

–  

–  

13  
(24)  
(20)  
29  

  

648  $
49  
(12)  
(9)  
(12)  

664  $

–  

–  
(2)  
(6)  
–  

  
–  $
–  
–  
–  
–  

–  $

  

1,150  $
28  

  

886  $
6  

  

2,675  $
94  

    

203    $
388    

  

5,171  $
379  

  

  
254  $ 11,801  
1,005  
109  

–  

–  

–  

–    

–  

–  

–  

180  
(286)  
(27)  
81  

  

580  $
245  
(284)  
(16)  
59  

584  $

47  
(65)  
(16)  
(85)  

  

467  $
94  
(64)  
(7)  
(63)  

427  $

170  
(106)  
(62)  
(17)  

(410)    
(1)    
(5)    
(5)    

–  
(49)  
(167)  
60  

  

1,480  $
222  
(92)  
(31)  
10  

    
–    $
–    
–    
–    
–    

  

584  $
578  
(5)  
(24)  
–  

–  
(56)  
1  
–  

–  
(589)  
(302)  
63  

  

  
108  $ 3,867  
1,276  
(497)  
(86)  
(6)  

88  
(40)  
1  
–  

1,589  $

–    $

1,133  $

157  $ 4,554  

Balance at end of period  

$ 145  $

1,308  $

1,126  $

773  $

2,754  $

170    $

5,394  $

308  $ 11,978  

period  

$ 145  $

644  $

542  $

346  $

1,165  $

170    $

4,261  $

151  $ 7,424  

As at October 31, 2022, we had total contractual commitments of $185 million to purchase premises and equipment (October 31, 2021 – $162 million). 

(1) 
(2)  Certain amounts have been revised from those previously presented. 

Lease payments 
Total lease payments for the year ended October 31, 2022 were $1,213 million, of which $578 million or 48% relates to variable 
payments and $635 million or 52% relates to fixed payments. Total lease payments for the year ended October 31, 2021 were 
$1,259 million, of which $613 million or 49% relates to variable payments and $646 million or 51% relates to fixed payments. 

Total variable lease payments not included in the measurement of lease liabilities were $571 million for the year ended 
October 31, 2022 (October 31, 2021 – $603 million). 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

197 

Note 11 Goodwill and other intangible assets  

577   $
–  
–  
12  

589   $

  

587   $
–  
–  
(10)  

577   $

Goodwill 

(Millions of  

Canadian dollars)  
Balance at beginning of  

period  
Acquisitions  
Dispositions  
Currency translations  

  

  

(Millions of  
Canadian dollars)  
Balance at beginning of  

period  
Acquisitions  
Dispositions  
Currency translations  

Canadian  
Banking  

Caribbean  
Banking  

Canadian  
Wealth  
Management  

Global Asset  
Management  

Management   Insurance  

Total  

Investor &  
Treasury  
Services  

Capital  
Markets  

For the year ended October 31, 2022  

U.S. Wealth  
Management  
(including  
City National)  

International  
Wealth  

$ 2,557   $ 1,600   $

17  
–  
–  

–  
–  
159  

1,964   $
33  
–  
(69)  

2,768   $

–  
(19)  
278  

115   $
880  
–  
47  

112   $
–  
–  
–  

148   $ 1,013   $ 10,854  
930  
–  
(19)  
–  
512  
86  

–  
–  
(1)  

Balance at end of period   $ 2,574   $ 1,759   $

1,928   $

3,027   $

1,042   $

112   $

147   $ 1,099   $ 12,277  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Canadian  
Banking  

Caribbean  
Banking  

Canadian  
Wealth  
Management  

Global Asset  
Management  

Management   Insurance  

Total  

Investor &  
Treasury  
Services  

Capital  
Markets  

For the year ended October 31, 2021  

U.S. Wealth  
Management  
(including  
City National)  

International  
Wealth  

$ 2,557   $

1,719   $

2,001   $

2,978   $

–  
–  
–  

–  
(3)  
(116)  

–  
–  
(37)  

–  
–  
(210)  

121   $
–  
(4)  
(2)  

115   $

112   $
–  
–  
–  

112   $

149   $ 1,078   $ 11,302  
–  
–  
(7)  
–  
(441)  
(65)  

–  
–  
(1)  

148   $ 1,013   $ 10,854  

Balance at end of period   $ 2,557   $

1,600   $

1,964   $

2,768   $

We perform our annual impairment test by comparing the carrying amount of each CGU to its recoverable amount. The 
recoverable amount of a CGU is represented by its VIU, except in circumstances where the carrying amount of a CGU exceeds its 
VIU. In such cases, the greater of the CGU’s FVLCD and its VIU is the recoverable amount. Our annual impairment test is 
performed as at August 1. The impact of subsequent acquisitions has also been considered in our impairment test.  

In our 2022 and 2021 annual impairment tests, the recoverable amounts of our Caribbean Banking and International Wealth 

Management CGUs were based on their FVLCD. The recoverable amounts of all other CGUs tested were based on their VIU. 

Value in use 
We calculate VIU using a five-year discounted cash flow method. Future cash flows are based on financial plans agreed by 
management, estimated based on forecast results, business initiatives, capital required to support future cash flows and returns 
to shareholders. Key drivers of future cash flows include net interest margins and average interest-earning assets. The values 
assigned to these drivers over the forecast period are based on past experience, external and internal economic forecasts, and 
management’s expectations of the impact of economic conditions on our financial results. Beyond the initial cash flow projection 
period, cash flows are assumed to increase at a constant rate using a nominal long-term growth rate (terminal growth rate). 
Terminal growth rates are based on the long-term steady state growth expectations in the countries within which the CGU 
operates. The discount rates used to determine the present value of each CGU’s projected future cash flows are based on the 
bank-wide cost of capital, adjusted for the risks to which each CGU is exposed. CGU-specific risks include: country risk, business/
operational risk, geographic risk (including political risk, devaluation risk, and government regulation), currency risk, and price 
risk (including product pricing risk and inflation). 

The estimation of VIU involves significant judgment in the determination of inputs to the discounted cash flow model and is 

most sensitive to changes in future cash flows, discount rates and terminal growth rates applied to cash flows beyond the 
forecast period. The sensitivity of the VIU to key inputs and assumptions used was tested by recalculating the recoverable 
amount using reasonably possible changes to those parameters. As at August 1, 2022, no reasonably possible change in an 
individual key input or assumption, as described, would result in a CGU’s carrying amount exceeding its recoverable amount 
based on VIU. 

198

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

The terminal growth rates and pre-tax discount rates used in our discounted cash flow models are summarized below. 

  
  

  

Group of cash generating units  
Canadian Banking  
Caribbean Banking  
Canadian Wealth Management  
Global Asset Management  
U.S. Wealth Management (including City National)  
International Wealth Management (2)  
Insurance  
Investor & Treasury Services  
Capital Markets  

  

As at
  

August 1, 2022  

August 1, 2021  

Discount  
rate (1)  

Terminal  
growth  

Discount  
rate (1)  

Terminal  
growth  
rate  

  
11.0%  
12.6   
11.8   
11.8   
12.8   
n.m.
  
11.6   
11.8   
12.4   

rate     
     
3.0%     
3.5      
3.0      
3.0      
3.0      
     
n.m.
3.0      
3.0      
3.0      

  
9.4%  
10.9   
10.5   
10.5   
11.1   
n.m.
  
10.2   
9.9   
11.8   

  
3.0%  
3.5   
3.0   
3.0   
3.0   
  
3.0   
3.0   
3.0   

n.m.

Pre-tax discount rates are determined implicitly based on post-tax discount rates. 
The recoverable amount for our International Wealth Management CGU is determined using a multiples-based approach. 

(1) 
(2) 
n.m.  not meaningful 

Fair value less costs of disposal – Caribbean Banking 
As at August 1, 2022, the recoverable amount of our Caribbean Banking CGU, based on FVLCD, was 109% of its carrying amount 
(August 1, 2021 – 123%). We calculated FVLCD using a discounted cash flow method that projects future cash flows over a 5-year 
period. Cash flows are based on management forecasts, adjusted to approximate the considerations of a prospective third-party 
buyer. Cash flows beyond the initial 5-year period are assumed to increase at a constant rate using a nominal long-term growth 
rate. Future cash flows, terminal growth rates, and discount rates are based on the same factors noted above. The forecast 
future cash flows were discounted using a pre-tax rate of 12.6% (August 1, 2021 – 10.9%), reflecting a higher interest rate 
environment. This fair value measurement is categorized as level 3 in the fair value hierarchy as certain significant inputs are not 
observable. We use significant judgment to determine inputs to the discounted cash flow model, which is most sensitive to 
changes in future cash flows, discount rates and terminal growth rates. 

We considered reasonably possible alternative scenarios, including market comparable transactions, which yielded 

valuations ranging from an immaterial deficit to an immaterial surplus. The sensitivity of the FVLCD to key inputs and 
assumptions was tested by recalculating the recoverable amount using reasonably possible change to those parameters. A 
50 bps change in the terminal growth rate would increase and decrease the recoverable amount by $231 million and $203 million, 
respectively. A 50 bps increase in the discount rate would decrease the recoverable amount by $267 million. A reduction in the 
forecasted cash flows of 10% per annum would reduce the recoverable amount by $440 million. If future cash flows were reduced 
by 8%, the recoverable amount would approximate the carrying amount. Changes in these assumptions have been applied 
holding other individual factors constant. However, changes in one factor may be magnified or offset by related changes in other 
assumptions as impacts to the recoverable amount are highly interdependent and changes in assumptions may not have a linear 
effect on the recoverable amount of the CGU. In aggregate, the range of reasonably possible outcomes would not materially 
affect the recoverable amount of the CGU. 

Other intangible assets 

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Gross carrying amount  
Balance at beginning of period  
Additions  
Acquisition through business combination  
Transfers  
Dispositions  
Impairment losses  
Currency translations  
Other changes  

Accumulated amortization  
Balance at beginning of period  
Amortization charge for the year  
Dispositions  
Impairment losses  
Currency translations  
Other changes  

Balance at end of period  

Net balance at end of period  

For the year ended October 31, 2022  

Core  
deposit  
intangibles  
  

Customer  
list and  
relationships  
  

In process  
software  
  

Internally  
generated  
software  
  

$

Other  
software  
  
 894   $
16  
14  
76  
(111)  
–  
48  
(29)  

 4,886   $
25  
–  
1,121  
(960)  
(16)  
71  
(51)   

$ (2,979)   $

  

(976)  
959  
9  
(36)  
(8)  

  
(572)   $
(137)  
109  
–  
(31)  
19  

1,474   $
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
149  
7  

  
(885)   $
(153)  
–  
–  
(98)  
(10)  

1,414   $
–  
1,292  
–  
(329)  
–  
113  
(18)  

1,236   $
1,256  
148  
(1,197)  
(5)  
(11)  
30  
78  

Total  
  
 9,904  
1,297  
1,454  
–  
(1,405)  
(27)  
411  
(13)  

  
(997)   $
(103)  
315  
–  
13  
23  

(749)   $

  

  
–   $ (5,433)  
(1,369)  
–  
1,383  
–  
–  
9  
(152)  
–  
24  
–  

–   $ (5,538)  

$ (3,031)   $

(612)   $

(1,146)   $

$

2,045   $

296   $

484   $

1,723   $

1,535   $

6,083  

Balance at end of period  

$

 5,076   $

908   $

1,630   $

2,472   $

1,535   $ 11,621  

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

199 

Note 11 Goodwill and other intangible assets (continued)  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Gross carrying amount  
Balance at beginning of period  
Additions  
Acquisition through business combination   
Transfers  
Dispositions  
Impairment losses  
Currency translations  
Other changes  

Accumulated amortization  
Balance at beginning of period  
Amortization charge for the year  
Dispositions  
Impairment losses  
Currency translations  
Other changes  

Balance at end of period  

Net balance at end of period  

For the year ended October 31, 2021  

$

Internally  
generated  
software (1)  
  
4,321   $
48  
–  
1,022  
(258)  
(157)  
(83)  
(7)  

Other  
software (1)  
  
1,031   $
15  
–  
69  
(186)  
–  
(43)  
8  

Core  
deposit  
intangibles  
  
1,586   $
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
(112)  
–  

Customer  
list and  
relationships (1)  
  
1,493   $
–  
–  
–  
(43)  
–  
(41)  
5  

In process  
software  
  
1,241   $
1,129  
–  
(1,091)  
(8)  
(9)  
(29)  
3  

Total  
  
9,672  
1,192  
–  
–  
(495)  
(166)  
(308)  
9  

$

$

$

$

  

(2,529)   $
(898)  
257  
137  
45  
9  

  
(630)   $
(138)  
185  
–  
24  
(13)  

  
(793)   $
(150)  
–  
–  
58  
–  

  
(968)   $
(101)  
43  
–  
29  
–  

(997)   $

  

–   $
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  

  
(4,920)  
(1,287)  
485  
137  
156  
(4)  

(2,979)   $

(572)   $

(885)   $

–   $

(5,433)  

1,907   $

322   $

589   $

417   $

1,236   $

4,471  

Balance at end of period  

4,886   $

894   $

1,474   $

1,414   $

1,236   $

9,904  

(1) 

Certain amounts have been revised from those previously presented. 

Note 12 Joint ventures and associated companies  

The following table summarizes the carrying value of our interests in joint ventures and associated companies accounted for 
under the equity method as well as our share of the income of those entities. 

Joint ventures  

  
As at and for the year ended   

Associated companies  

$

October 31  
2022  
248   $
  
103   $

$

October 31  

October 31  
2022  

2021    
223     $ 463   $

October 31  
2021  
431  

    
107     $

  

7   $

  
23  

We do not have any joint ventures or associated companies that are individually material to our financial results. 

Certain of our subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates are subject to regulatory requirements of the jurisdictions in which 

they operate. When these subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates are subject to such requirements, they may be restricted 
from transferring to us our share of their assets in the form of cash dividends, loans or advances. As at October 31, 2022, 
restricted net assets of these subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates were $44 billion (October 31, 2021 – $39 billion). 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Carrying amount  

Share of:  

Net income  

Note 13 Other assets  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Accounts receivable and prepaids  
Accrued interest receivable  
Cash collateral  
Commodity trading receivables  
Deferred income tax asset  
Employee benefit assets  
Insurance-related assets  

Collateral loans  
Policy loans  
Reinsurance assets  
Other  

Investments in joint ventures and associates  
Margin deposits  
Precious metals  
Receivable from brokers, dealers and clients  
Taxes receivable  
Other  

200

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

As at   

October 31  
2022  

October 31  
2021  

$  4,250   $ 5,056  
2,195  
14,541  
6,996  
2,011  
2,640  
  
615  
87  
1,032  
62  
654  
11,441  
1,619  
3,395  
4,891  
4,648  

4,703  
25,634  
7,054  
1,472  
3,331  
  
524  
85  
1,084  
12  
711  
14,684  
1,772  
3,299  
6,933  
4,752  

$ 80,300   $ 61,883  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Note 14 Deposits  

October 31, 2022  

October 31, 2021  

As at   

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Personal  
Business and government  
Bank  

Demand (1)   Notice (2)  
$  203,645   $ 64,743   $ 136,544   $
17,855  
490  

348,004  
10,458  

394,011  
33,064  

Term (3)   

Total    Demand (1)   Notice (2)  

Term (3)  

 404,932    $ 207,493   $ 64,613   $ 90,382   $
759,870    
44,012    

319,533  
28,992  

356,020  
12,549  

20,800  
449  

Total  
362,488  
696,353  
41,990  

Non-interest-bearing (4)  

Canada  
United States  
Europe (5)  
Other International  

Interest-bearing (4)  

Canada  
United States  
Europe (5)  
Other International  

  

  

  

7,797   $

$ 149,737   $

$  562,107   $ 83,088   $ 563,619   $ 1,208,814    $ 576,062   $ 85,862   $ 438,907   $ 1,100,831  
  
    
160,239  
54,021  
632  
8,002  
  
648,308  
141,835  
71,759  
16,035  

  
713   $
–  
–  
–  
  
312,987  
77,597  
36,788  
10,822  

466   $
–  
–  
–  
  
409,586  
85,111  
52,144  
16,312  

52,702    
620    
7,840    
    
733,347    
153,576    
80,674    
22,055    

52,702  
620  
7,840  
  
305,779  
11,410  
28,276  
5,743  

54,021  
632  
8,002  
  
315,464  
6,978  
34,278  
5,212  

–  
–  
–  
  
17,982  
57,055  
254  
–  

–  
–  
–  
  
19,857  
57,260  
693  
1  

158,000    $ 151,475   $

8,051   $

  

  

$ 562,107   $ 83,088   $ 563,619   $ 1,208,814    $ 576,062   $ 85,862   $ 438,907   $ 1,100,831  

Demand deposits are deposits for which we do not have the right to require notice of withdrawal, which include both savings and chequing accounts. 

(1) 
(2)  Notice deposits are deposits for which we can legally require notice of withdrawal. These deposits are primarily savings accounts. 
(3) 
(4) 

Term deposits are deposits payable on a fixed date, and include term deposits, guaranteed investment certificates and similar instruments. 
The geographical splits of the deposits are based on the point of origin of the deposits and where the revenue is recognized. As at October 31, 2022, deposits denominated 
in U.S. dollars, British pounds, Euro and other foreign currencies were $465 billion, $35 billion, $50 billion and $30 billion, respectively (October 31, 2021 – $399 billion, 
$35 billion, $43 billion and $27 billion, respectively). 
Europe includes the United Kingdom, Luxembourg, the Channel Islands, France and Italy. 

(5) 

Contractual maturities of term deposits 

Aggregate amount of term deposits in denominations of one hundred thousand dollars or more  

Average deposit balances and average rates of interest 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Within 1 year:  

less than 3 months  
3 to 6 months  
6 to 12 months  

1 to 2 years  
2 to 3 years  
3 to 4 years  
4 to 5 years  
Over 5 years  
  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except for percentage amounts)  
Canada  
United States  
Europe  
Other International  

Note 15 Insurance  

As at

  

October 31  
2022  
  

October 31  
2021  
  
$ 159,602   $ 133,776  
64,062  
83,871  
45,532  
29,204  
24,573  
25,329  
32,560  
$ 563,619   $ 438,907  
$ 521,000   $ 416,000  

61,996  
156,531  
49,225  
42,809  
27,609  
33,835  
32,012  

For the year ended  

October 31, 2022  

  

October 31, 2021  

$ 

Average  
balances  
847,052  
207,436  
81,824  
28,613  

Average  
rates  
1.02%  
0.50   
1.03   
0.72   

  
   $
  
  
  

Average  
balances  
772,875  
180,230  
77,217  
28,731  

Average  
rates  
0.61%  
0.13   
0.55   
0.33   

$ 1,164,925  

0.92%  

   $ 1,059,053  

0.51%  

Risk management 
Insurance risk is the risk of fluctuations in the timing, frequency or severity of insured events, relative to our expectations at the 
time of underwriting. We do not have a high degree of concentration risk due to our geographic diversity and business mix. 
Concentration risk is not a major concern for the life insurance business as it does not have a material level of region-specific 
characteristics. Reinsurance is also used for a majority of our Canadian insurance business to lower our risk profile and limit the 
liability on a single claim. We manage underwriting and pricing risk through the use of underwriting guidelines which detail the 
class, nature and type of business that may be accepted, pricing policies by product line and controls over policy wordings. The 
risk that claims are handled or paid inappropriately is mitigated by using a range of information technology (IT) system controls 
and manual processes conducted by experienced staff. These, together with a range of detailed policies and procedures, ensure 
that all claims are handled in a timely, appropriate and accurate manner. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

201 

Note 15 Insurance (continued)  

Reinsurance ceded 
In the ordinary course of business, our insurance operations reinsure risks to other insurance and reinsurance companies in 
order to lower our risk profile, limit loss exposure to large risks, and provide additional capacity for future growth. These ceding 
reinsurance arrangements do not relieve our insurance subsidiaries from our direct obligations to the insured parties. We 
evaluate the financial condition of the reinsurers and monitor our concentrations of credit risks to minimize our exposure to 
losses from reinsurer insolvency. Reinsurance amounts (ceded premiums) included in Non-interest income are shown in the 
table below. 

(1) 

Includes the change in fair value of investments backing our policyholder liabilities. 

Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities 
All actuarial assumptions are set in conjunction with Canadian Institute of Actuaries Standards of Practice and OSFI 
requirements. The assumptions that have the greatest effect on the measurement of insurance liabilities, the processes used to 
determine them and the assumptions used as at October 31, 2022 are as follows: 

Mortality and morbidity – Mortality estimates are based on standard industry insured mortality tables, adjusted where 
appropriate to reflect our own experience. Morbidity assumptions are made with respect to the rates of claim incidence and 
claim termination for health insurance policies and are based on a combination of industry and our own experience. 

Future investment yield – Assumptions are based on the current yield rate, a reinvestment assumption and an allowance for 
future credit losses for each line of business, and are developed using interest rate scenario testing, including prescribed 
scenarios for determination of minimum liabilities as set out in the actuarial standards. 

Policyholder behaviour – Under certain policies, the policyholder has a contractual right to change benefits and premiums, as 
well as convert policies to permanent forms of insurance. All policyholders have the right to terminate their policies through 
lapse. Lapses represent the termination of policies due to non-payment of premiums. Lapse assumptions are primarily based on 
our recent experience adjusted for emerging industry experience where applicable. 

  

  

  

Net premiums and claims 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Gross premiums  
Premiums ceded to reinsurers  

Net premiums  

Gross claims and benefits (1)  
Reinsurers’ share of claims and benefits  

Net claims  

Significant insurance assumptions 

Life Insurance  

Canadian Insurance  
Mortality rates (1)  
Morbidity rates (2)  
Future reinvestment yield (3)  
Lapse rates (4)  

International Insurance  

Mortality rates (1)  
Future reinvestment yield (3)  

For the year ended  

October 31  
2022  
4,913   $
(260)  
4,653   $

1,741   $
(273)  
1,468   $

$

$

$

$

October 31  
2021  

5,090  
(250)  

4,840  

3,834  
(287)  

3,547  

As at   

October 31  
2022  

October 31  
2021  

  
  
0.11%  
1.81   
3.75   
0.50   
  
0.80   
2.90   

  
  
0.12%  
1.78   
3.76   
0.50   
  
0.79   
2.90   

Average annual death rate for the largest portfolio of insured policies. 
Average net termination rate for the individual and group disability insurance portfolio. 

(1) 
(2) 
(3)  Ultimate reinvestment rate of the insurance operations. 
(4)  Ultimate policy termination rate (lapse rate) for the largest permanent life insurance portfolio that relies on a higher termination rate to maintain its profitability 

(lapse-supported policies). 

202

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities 
The following table summarizes our gross and reinsurers’ share of insurance liabilities at the end of the year. 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Life insurance policyholder liabilities  

Life, health and annuity  
Investment contracts (1)  

Non-life insurance policyholder liabilities  

Unearned premium provision (1)  
Unpaid claims provision  

October 31, 2022  

October 31, 2021  

As at   

  

Gross  
  

Ceded  
  

Net     
     

Gross  
  

$ 11,481   $

41  

$ 11,522   $

902   $ 10,579     $ 12,775   $
41     
902   $ 10,620     $ 12,817   $

42  

–  

Ceded  
  

Net  
  
861   $ 11,914  
42  

–  

861   $ 11,956  

  
 7   $
30  

 37   $

$

$

$ 11,559   $

  
6   $

  
–   $
1  

     
7     $
29     
36     $
903   $ 10,656     $ 12,864   $

47   $

1   $

41  

  
–   $
3  

3   $

  
6  
38  

44  

864   $ 12,000  

(1) 

Liabilities for investment contracts and unearned premium provision are reported in Other liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. 

Reconciliation of life insurance policyholder liabilities 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Balances at beginning of period  
New and in-force policies (1)  
Changes in assumption and methodology  
Net change in investment contracts  

Balances at end of period  

(1) 

Includes the change in fair value of investments backing our policyholder liabilities. 

October 31, 2022  

  

October 31, 2021  

For the year ended  

Gross  
$ 12,817   $
(1,288)  
(6)  
(1)  

$ 11,522   $

Ceded  

Gross  

Net     
861   $ 11,956     $ 12,123   $
(130)   (1,158)    
(177)    
171  
(1)    
–  
902   $ 10,620     $ 12,817   $

775  
(89)  
8  

Ceded  

Net  
752   $ 11,371  
667  
108  
(90)  
1  
8  
–  

861   $ 11,956  

The net decrease in life insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities over the prior year was primarily attributable to market 
movements on assets backing life insurance policyholder liabilities and asset and liability matching activities, partially offset by 
business growth. During the year, we reviewed all key actuarial methods and assumptions which are used in determining the 
policy benefit liabilities resulting in a $177 million net decrease to insurance liabilities comprised of: (i) a decrease of $225 million 
for revised actuarial reserves on interest rate risk; (ii) an increase of $9 million due to reinsurance contract renegotiations; 
(iii) an increase of $37 million arising from insurance risk related assumption updates largely due to mortality, morbidity, and 
expense assumptions; and (iv) an increase of $2 million due to changes to valuation models and related data. 

Sensitivity analysis 
The following table presents the sensitivity of the level of insurance policyholder liabilities disclosed in this note to reasonably 
possible changes in the actuarial assumptions used to calculate them. The percentage change in each variable is applied to a 
range of existing actuarial modelling assumptions to derive the possible impact on net income. The analyses are performed 
where a single assumption is changed while holding other assumptions constant, which is unlikely to occur in practice. 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except for percentage amounts)  
Increase in market interest rates (1)  
Decrease in market interest rates (1)  
Increase in equity market values (2)  
Decrease in equity market values (2)  
Increase in maintenance expenses (3)  
Life Insurance (3)  

Adverse change in annuitant mortality rates  
Adverse change in assurance mortality rates  
Adverse change in morbidity rates  
Adverse change in lapse rates  

  

Net income impact  
for the year ended  

Change in  
variable  

October 31  
2022  

October 31  
2021  
(14)  
17  
8  
(10)  
(37)  
  
(287)  
(67)  
(213)  
(253)  

(10)  $
5  
6  
(10)  
(33)  
  
(166)  
(59)  
(181)  
(199)  

1%  $
1   
10   
10   
5   
  
2   
2   
5   
10   

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

Sensitivities for market interest rates include the expected current period earnings impact of a 100 basis points shift in the yield curve by increasing the current 
reinvestment rates while holding the assumed ultimate rates constant. The sensitivity consists of both the impact on assumed reinvestment rates in the actuarial 
liabilities and any changes in fair value of assets and liabilities from the yield curve shift. 
Sensitivities to changes in equity market values are composed of the expected current period earnings impact from differences in the changes in fair value of the equity 
asset holdings and the partially offsetting impact on the actuarial liabilities. 
Sensitivities to changes in maintenance expenses and life insurance actuarial assumptions include the expected current period earnings impact from recognition of 
increased liabilities due to an adverse change in the given assumption over the lifetime of all in-force policies. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

203 

Note 16 Segregated funds  

We offer certain individual variable insurance contracts that allow policyholders to invest in segregated funds. The investment 
returns on these funds are passed directly to the policyholders. Amounts invested are at the policyholders’ risk, except where the 
policyholders have selected options providing maturity and death benefit guarantees. A liability for the guarantees is recorded in 
Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities. 

Segregated funds net assets are recorded at fair value. All of our segregated funds net assets are categorized as Level 1 in 

the fair value hierarchy. The fair value of the segregated funds liabilities is equal to the fair value of the segregated funds net 
assets. Segregated funds net assets and segregated funds liabilities are presented on separate lines on the Consolidated 
Balance Sheets. The following tables present the composition of net assets and the changes in net assets for the year. 

Segregated funds net assets 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Cash  
Investment in mutual funds  
Other assets (liabilities), net  

Changes in net assets 

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Net assets at beginning of period  
Additions (deductions):  

Deposits from policyholders  
Net realized and unrealized gains (losses)  
Interest and dividends  
Payment to policyholders  
Management and administrative fees  

Net assets at end of period  

$

$

$

As at  

October 31  
2022  

October 31  
2021  

39   $

2,598  
1  

2,638   $

40  
2,625  
1  

2,666  

For the year ended  

October 31  
2022  
2,666   $

  
859  
(301)  
56  
(573)  
(69)  

October 31  
2021  

1,922  
  
975  
381  
51  
(604)  
(59)  

2,666  

$

2,638   $

Note 17 Employee benefits – Pension and other post-employment benefits  

Plan characteristics 
We sponsor a number of programs that provide pension and post-employment benefits to eligible employees. The majority of 
beneficiaries of the pension plans are located in Canada and other beneficiaries of the pension plans are primarily located in the 
U.S., the U.K. and the Caribbean. The pension arrangements including investment, plan benefits and funding decisions are 
governed by local pension committees or trustees, who are legally segregated from the Bank, or management. Significant plan 
changes require the approval of the Board of Directors.  

Our defined benefit pension plans provide pension benefits based on years of service, contributions and average earnings at 

retirement. Our primary defined benefit pension plans are closed to new members. New employees are generally eligible to join 
defined contribution pension plans. The specific features of these plans vary by location. We also provide supplemental 
non-registered (non-qualified) pension plans for certain executives and senior management that are typically unfunded or 
partially funded. 

Our defined contribution pension plans provide pension benefits based on accumulated employee and Bank contributions. 

The Bank contributions are based on a percentage of an employee’s annual earnings and a portion of the Bank contribution may 
be dependent on the amount being contributed by the employee and their years of service. 

Our primary other post-employment benefit plans provide health, dental, disability and life insurance coverage and cover a 

number of current and retired employees who are mainly located in Canada. These plans are unfunded unless required by 
legislation. 

We measure our benefit obligations and pension assets as at October 31 each year. All plans are valued using the projected 

unit-credit method. We fund our registered defined benefit pension plans in accordance with actuarially determined amounts 
required to satisfy employee benefit obligations under current pension regulations. For our principal pension plan, the most 
recent funding actuarial valuation was completed on January 1, 2022, and the next valuation will be completed on January 1, 2023. 
For the year ended October 31, 2022, total contributions to our pension plans (defined benefit and defined contribution 

plans) and other post-employment benefit plans were $427 million and $79 million (October 31, 2021 – $456 million and 
$75 million), respectively. For 2023, total contributions to our pension plans and other post-employment benefit plans are 
expected to be $341 million and $84 million, respectively. 

Risks 
By their design, the defined benefit pension and other post-employment benefit plans expose the Bank to various risks such as 
investment performance, reductions in discount rates used to value the obligations, increased longevity of plan members, future 
inflation levels impacting future salary increases as well as future increases in healthcare costs. These risks will reduce over time 
due to the membership closure of our primary defined benefit pension plans and migration to defined contribution pension plans. 

204

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

The following table presents the financial position related to all of our material pension and other post-employment benefit plans 
worldwide, including executive retirement arrangements. 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Canada  

Fair value of plan assets  
Present value of defined benefit obligation  

Fair value of plan assets  
Present value of defined benefit obligation  

Net surplus (deficit)  

International  

Net surplus (deficit)  

Total  

Fair value of plan assets  
Present value of defined benefit obligation  

Total net surplus (deficit)  

Effect of asset ceiling  

  

  

  

  

October 31, 2022  

October 31, 2021  

As at   

  

Defined benefit  
pension plans  
  

14,310   $
11,271  

Other post-
employment  
benefit plans     
     
 –      $

1,387     

Defined benefit  
pension plans  
  

16,698   $
14,403  

Other post-
employment  
benefit plans  
  
–  
1,703  

 3,039   $

(1,387)     $

2,295   $

(1,703)  

  
 716   $
622  

 94   $

15,026   $
11,893  

     
–      $

75     

(75)     $

     
–      $

1,462     

  

  

1,005   $
912  

93   $

17,703   $
15,315  

  

  

  

  
–  
77  

(77)  

  
–  
1,780  

–  

(1,780)  

  
–  
(1,780)  

(1,780)  

 3,133   $

(1,462)     $

2,388   $

(1,780)  

(8)  

–     

(6)  

Total net surplus (deficit), net of effect of asset ceiling  

 3,125   $

(1,462)     $

2,382   $

Amounts recognized in our Consolidated Balance Sheets  

Employee benefit assets  
Employee benefit liabilities  

Total net surplus (deficit), net of effect of asset ceiling  

 3,331   $
(206)  

 3,125   $

     
–      $

(1,462)    

(1,462)     $

2,640   $
(258)  

2,382   $

The following table presents an analysis of the movement in the financial position related to all of our material pension and other 
post-employment benefit plans worldwide, including executive retirement arrangements. 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Fair value of plan assets at beginning of period  

Interest income  
Remeasurements  

Return on plan assets (excluding interest income)  

Change in foreign currency exchange rate  
Contributions – Employer  
Contributions – Plan participant  
Payments  
Payments – amount paid in respect of settlements  
Business combinations/Disposals  
Other  

Fair value of plan assets at end of period  

Benefit obligation at beginning of period  

Current service costs  
Past service costs  
Gains and losses on settlements  
Interest expense  
Remeasurements  

Actuarial losses (gains) from demographic  

assumptions  

Actuarial losses (gains) from financial assumptions  
Actuarial losses (gains) from experience adjustments  

Change in foreign currency exchange rate  
Contributions – Plan participant  
Payments  
Payments – amount paid in respect of settlements  
Business combinations/Disposals  

Benefit obligation at end of period  

Unfunded obligation  
Wholly or partly funded obligation  

Total benefit obligation  

As at or for the year ended  

October 31, 2022  

  

October 31, 2021  

Defined benefit  
pension plans (1)  
$

Other post-
employment  
benefit plans     

Defined benefit  
pension plans (1)  

17,703   $
580  
  
(2,931)  
(62)  
177  
45  
(610)  
3  
135  
(14)  

15,026   $

15,315   $
308  
(1)  
(3)  
496  
  

(2)  
(3,797)  
83  
(47)  
45  
(610)  
3  
103  

 –      $
–     
     
–     
–     
79     
20     
(99)    
–     
–     
–     

–      $

1,780      $
42     
2     
–     
63     
     

(1)    
(341)    
(9)    
6     
20     
(99)    
–     
(1)    

11,893   $

 23   $

11,870  

1,462      $

1,462      $

–     

11,893   $

1,462      $

Other post-
employment  
benefit plans  
–  
–  
  
–  
–  
75  
19  
(94)  
–  
–  
–  

–  

1,953  
46  
(1)  
–  
57  
  

(6)  
(184)  
(2)  
(7)  
19  
(94)  
–  
(1)  

1,780  

1,633  
147  

1,780  

16,024   $
432  
  
1,614  
(21)  
221  
46  
(594)  
(2)  
(4)  
(13)  

17,703   $

16,351   $
359  
–  
2  
439  
  

–  
(1,253)  
(5)  
(24)  
46  
(594)  
(2)  
(4)  

15,315   $

26   $

15,289  

15,315   $

(1) 

For pension plans with funding deficits, the benefit obligations and fair value of plan assets as at October 31, 2022 were $323 million and $117 million, respectively 
(October 31, 2021 – $413 million and $155 million, respectively). 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

205 

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

Note 17 Employee benefits – Pension and other post-employment benefits (continued)  

Pension and other post-employment benefit expense 
The following table presents the composition of our pension and other post-employment benefit expense related to our material 
pension and other post-employment benefit plans worldwide. 

  

  

  

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Current service costs  
Past service costs  
Gains and losses on settlements  
Net interest expense (income)  
Remeasurements of other long term benefits  
Administrative expense  

Defined benefit pension expense  
Defined contribution pension expense  

Pension plans  

  

October 31  

For the year ended  

Other post-employment  
benefit plans  

2021     
359      $
–     
2     
7     
–     
13     

October 31  
2022  
42  
2  
–  
63  
(26)  
–  

$

October 31  
2021  
46  
(1)  
–  
57  
(12)  
–  

381      $
235     

616      $

81  
–  

81  

$

$

90  
–  

90  

$

October 31  
2022  
308  
(1)  
(3)  
(84)  
–  
14  

$

$

234  
250  

484  

$

$

$

For the year ended  

Defined benefit pension  
plans  

  

Other post-employment  
benefit plans  

October 31  
2022  
  
(2)   $

$

October 31  

2021     
     
–      $

October 31  
2022  
  
(1)   $

(3,797)  
83  
2,931  
2  

(1,253)    
(5)    
(1,614)    
5     

(319)  
(5)  
–  
–  

October 31  
2021  
  
(6)  
(177)  
3  
–  
–  

$ (783)   $ (2,867)     $ (325)   $

(180)  

Service costs for the year ended October 31, 2022 totalled $305 million (October 31, 2021 – $356 million) for pension plans in Canada 
and $2 million (October 31, 2021 – $3 million) for International plans. Net interest expense (income) for the year ended October 31, 
2022 totalled $(83) million (October 31, 2021 – $7 million) for pension plans in Canada and $(1) million (October 31, 2021 – $nil) for 
International plans. 

Pension and other post-employment benefit remeasurements 
The following table presents the composition of our remeasurements recorded in OCI related to our material pension and other 
post-employment benefit plans worldwide. 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Actuarial (gains) losses:  

Changes in demographic assumptions  
Changes in financial assumptions  
Experience adjustments  

Return on plan assets (excluding interest based on discount rate)  
Change in asset ceiling (excluding interest income)  

Remeasurements recorded in OCI for the year ended October 31, 2022 were gains of $798 million (October 31, 2021 – gains of 
$2,819 million) for pension plans in Canada and losses of $15 million (October 31, 2021 – gains of $48 million) for International plans. 

Investment policy and strategies 
Defined benefit pension plan assets are invested prudently in order to meet our longer-term pension obligations. The pension 
plans’ investment strategy is to hold a diversified mix of investments by asset class and geographic location in order to reduce 
investment-specific risk to the funded status while maximizing the expected returns to meet pension obligations. Investment of 
the plan’s assets follows an asset/liability framework as investment is conducted with careful consideration of the pension 
obligation’s sensitivity to interest rates and credit spreads which are key risk factors impacting the obligation’s value. Factors 
taken into consideration in developing our asset mix include but are not limited to the following: 

(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)

the nature of the underlying benefit obligations, including the duration and term profile of the liabilities; 
the member demographics, including expectations for normal retirements, terminations, and deaths; 
the financial position of the pension plans; 
the diversification benefits obtained by the inclusion of multiple asset classes; and 
expected asset returns, including asset and liability correlations, along with liquidity requirements of the plan. 

To implement our asset mix policy, we may invest in debt securities, equity securities, and alternative investments. Our holdings 
in certain investments, including common shares, debt securities rated lower than BBB and residential and commercial 
mortgages, cannot exceed a defined percentage of the market value of our defined benefit pension plan assets. We may use 
derivative instruments as either a synthetic investment to more efficiently replicate the performance of an underlying security, or 
as a hedge against financial risks within the plan. To manage our credit risk exposure, where derivative instruments are not 
centrally cleared, counterparties are required to meet minimum credit ratings and enter into collateral agreements. 

Our defined benefit pension plan assets are primarily comprised of debt and equity securities and alternative investments. 

Our equity securities generally have unadjusted quoted market prices in an active market (Level 1) and our debt securities 
generally have quoted market prices for similar assets in an active market (Level 2). Alternative investments and other includes 
cash, hedge funds, and private fund investments including infrastructure equity, real estate leases and private debt and equity. In 

206

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

the case of private fund investments, no quoted market prices are usually available (Level 2 or Level 3). These fund assets are 
either valued by an independent valuator or priced using observable market inputs. 

During the year ended October 31, 2022, the management of defined benefit pension investments focused on increased 
allocation to risk reducing investments and strategies, improving diversification, while striving to maintain expected investment 
return. Over time, an increasing allocation to debt securities is being used to reduce asset/liability duration mismatch and hence 
variability of the plan’s funded status due to interest rate movement. Longer maturity debt securities, given their price sensitivity 
to movements in interest rates, are considered to be a good economic hedge to risk associated with the plan’s liabilities, which 
are discounted using predominantly long maturity bond interest rates as inputs. 

Asset allocation of defined benefit pension plans (1), (2) 
  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentages)  

Fair value  

  

  

Equity securities  

Domestic  
Foreign  

Debt securities  

Domestic government bonds (4)  
Foreign government bonds  
Corporate and other bonds  

Alternative investments and other  

As at   

  

Quoted  
in active  

October 31, 2022  

Percentage  
of total  
plan assets  

    

market (3)     Fair value  
  
1,879  
4,202  
  
3,766  
71  
3,844  
3,941  

100%      $
100  
  
–  
–  
–  
8  

  
  
  
  
  
  

  
10%  
19  
  
23  
1  
21  
26  

October 31, 2021  

Percentage  
of total  
plan assets  

Quoted  
in active  
market (3)  

  
11%  
24  
  
21  
–  
22  
22  

  
100%  
100  
  
–  
–  
–  
12  

$

  
1,469  
2,799  
  
3,489  
114  
3,171  
3,984  

$ 15,026  

100%  

30%      $ 17,703  

100%  

37%  

The asset allocation is based on the underlying investments held directly and indirectly through the funds as this is how we manage our investment policy and strategies. 

(1) 
(2)  Represents the total plan assets held in our Canadian and International pension plans. 
(3) 

If our assessment of whether or not an asset was quoted in an active market was based on direct investments, 34% of our total plan assets would be classified as quoted 
in an active market (October 31, 2021 – 41%). 

(4)  Amounts are net of securities sold under repurchase agreements. 

As at October 31, 2022, the plan assets include 0.7 million (October 31, 2021 – 1.0 million) of our common shares with a fair 
value of $89 million (October 31, 2021 – $128 million) and $48 million (October 31, 2021 – $29 million) of our debt securities. For the 
year ended October 31, 2022, dividends received on our common shares held in the plan assets were $4 million (October 31, 2021 – 
$4 million). 

Maturity profile 
The following table presents the maturity profile of our defined benefit pension plan obligation. 

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except participants and years)  

Number of plan participants  
Actual benefit payments 2022  
Benefits expected to be paid 2023  
Benefits expected to be paid 2024  
Benefits expected to be paid 2025  
Benefits expected to be paid 2026  
Benefits expected to be paid 2027  
Benefits expected to be paid 2028-2032  
Weighted average duration of defined benefit payments  

As at October 31, 2022  

Canada  

International  

Total  

$

66,616  
 585  
643  
668  
691  
713  
733  
3,907  
12.4 years  

$

6,043  
22  
35  
34  
33  
35  
34  
189  
15.1 years  

$

72,659  
607  
678  
702  
724  
748  
767  
4,096  
12.5 years  

Significant assumptions 
Our methodologies to determine significant assumptions used in calculating the defined benefit pension and other post-
employment benefit expense are as follows: 

Discount rate 
For the Canadian pension and other post-employment benefit plans, all future expected benefit payments at each measurement 
date are discounted at spot rates from a derived Canadian AA corporate bond yield curve. The derived curve is based on actual 
short and mid-maturity corporate AA rates and extrapolated longer term rates. The extrapolated corporate AA rates are derived 
from observed corporate A, corporate AA and provincial AA yields. For the International pension and other post-employment 
benefit plans, all future expected benefit payments at each measurement date are discounted at spot rates from a local AA 
corporate bond yield curve. Spot rates beyond 30 years are set to equal the 30-year spot rate. The discount rate is the equivalent 
single rate that produces the same discounted value as that determined using the entire discount curve. This valuation 
methodology does not rely on assumptions regarding reinvestment returns. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

207 

Note 17 Employee benefits – Pension and other post-employment benefits (continued)  

Rate of increase in future compensation 
The assumptions for increases in future compensation are developed separately for each plan, where relevant. Each assumption 
is set based on the price inflation assumption and compensation policies in each market, as well as relevant local statutory and 
plan-specific requirements. 

Healthcare cost trend rates 
Healthcare cost calculations are based on both short and long term trend assumptions established using the plan’s recent 
experience as well as market expectations. 

Weighted average assumptions to determine benefit obligation 

As at

  

Defined benefit pension  
plans  

  

Other post-employment  
benefit plans  

October 31  
2022  

October 31  

October 31  
2022  

October 31  
2021  

5.4%  
3.0%  
  
n.a.  
n.a.  

2021     

3.3%     
3.0%     
     
n.a.     
n.a.     

5.5%  
n.a.  
  
3.5%  
3.1%  

3.6%  
n.a.  
  
3.4%  
3.1%  

Discount rate  
Rate of increase in future compensation  
Healthcare cost trend rates (1)  

– Medical  
– Dental  

n.a.  not applicable 

(1) 

For our other post-employment benefit plans, the assumed trend rates used to measure the expected benefit costs of the defined benefit obligations are also the 
ultimate trend rates. 

Mortality assumptions 
Mortality assumptions are significant in measuring our obligations under the defined benefit pension plans. These assumptions 
have been set based on country specific statistics. Future longevity improvements have been considered and included where 
appropriate. The following table summarizes the mortality assumptions used for material plans. 

October 31, 2022  

October 31, 2021  

As at   

  

Life expectancy at 65 for a member currently at      Life expectancy at 65 for a member currently at  
  

Age 45  

Age 65  

Age 45  

Age 65  

  

  

(In years)  

Country  

Canada  
United Kingdom  

Male  

Female    

  
23.9  
23.4  

    
24.2    
25.4    

Male  

  
24.8  
24.7  

Female    
    
25.1    
26.8    

Male  

Female    

Male  

Female  

  
23.8  
23.6  

    
24.2    
25.4    

  
24.8  
25.3  

  
25.1  
27.2  

Sensitivity analysis 
Assumptions adopted can have a significant effect on the value of the obligations for defined benefit pension and other post-
employment benefit plans and are based on historical experience and market inputs. The increase (decrease) in obligation in the 
following table has been determined for key assumptions assuming all other assumptions are held constant. In practice, this is 
unlikely to occur, as changes in some of the assumptions may be correlated. The following table presents the sensitivity analysis 
of key assumptions for 2022. 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Discount rate  

Impact of 100 bps increase in discount rate  
Impact of 100 bps decrease in discount rate  

Rate of increase in future compensation  

Impact of 50 bps increase in rate of increase in future compensation  
Impact of 50 bps decrease in rate of increase in future compensation  

Mortality rate  

Impact of an increase in longevity by one additional year  

Healthcare cost trend rate  

Impact of 100 bps increase in healthcare cost trend rate  
Impact of 100 bps decrease in healthcare cost trend rate  

n.a. not applicable 

208

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Increase (decrease)  
in obligation  

Defined benefit  
pension plans  

Other post-  
employment  
benefit plans  

$

  

(1,348)   $
1,649  
  
29  
(31)  
  
287  
  
n.a.  
n.a.  

  
(160)  
198  
  
–  
–  
  
20  
  
57  
(48)  

Note 18 Other liabilities  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Accounts payable and accrued expenses  
Accrued interest payable  
Cash collateral  
Commodity liabilities  
Deferred income  
Deferred income taxes  
Dividends payable  
Employee benefit liabilities  
Insurance related liabilities  
Lease liabilities  
Negotiable instruments  
Payable to brokers, dealers and clients  
Payroll and related compensation  
Precious metals certificates  
Provisions  
Short-term borrowings of subsidiaries  
Taxes payable  
Other  
  

Note 19 Subordinated debentures  

As at   

October 31  
2022  
1,292   $
5,019  
26,143  
10,038  
3,660  
439  
1,856  
1,668  
324  
5,110  
1,715  
10,974  
8,991  
557  
627  
9,609  
2,136  
5,077  
95,235   $

October 31  
2021  
1,867  
2,178  
16,712  
7,916  
3,518  
74  
1,622  
2,038  
366  
5,077  
1,774  
6,461  
9,340  
613  
601  
–  
3,403  
6,741  
70,301  

$

$

The debentures are unsecured obligations and are subordinated in right of payment to the claims of depositors and certain other 
creditors. The amounts presented below are net of our own holdings in these debentures, and include the impact of fair value 
hedges used for managing interest rate risk. 

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage and foreign currency)  

Maturity  
July 15, 2022 (1)  
June 8, 2023  
January 27, 2026 (2)  
November 1, 2027 (3)  
July 25, 2029 (2)  
December 23, 2029 (2)  
June 30, 2030 (2)  
November 3, 2031 (2)  
May 3, 2032 (2)  
January 28, 2033 (2)  
October 1, 2083  
June 29, 2085  
  
Deferred financing costs  
  

Earliest par value  
redemption date  
  
  
  
November 1, 2022  
July 25, 2024  
December 23, 2024  
June 30, 2025  
November 3, 2026  
May 3, 2027  
January 28, 2028  
Any interest payment date  
Any interest payment date  
  
  
  

Interest  
rate  
5.38%  
9.30%  
4.65%  
4.75%  
2.74% (4)  
2.88% (5)  
2.09% (6)  
2.14% (7)  
2.94% (8)  
1.67% (9)  
(10)  
(11)  
  
  
  

Denominated in  
foreign currency  
(millions)  
US$150   $

  
US$1,500  
TT$300  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
US$174  

   $
  
   $

As at   

October 31  
2022  

–  $

110  
1,884  
60  
1,415  
1,412  
1,250  
1,637  
932  
875  
224  
237  
10,036  $
(11)  
10,025  $

October 31  
2021  
188  
110  
1,916  
55  
1,499  
1,489  
1,250  
1,717  
–  
943  
224  
215  
9,606  
(13)  
9,593  

(1)  On July 15, 2022, all US$150 million of outstanding 5.38% subordinated debentures matured. 
(2) 

The notes include NVCC provisions, necessary for the notes to qualify as Tier 2 regulatory capital under Basel III. NVCC provisions require the conversion of the 
instrument into a variable number of common shares in the event that OSFI deems the Bank non-viable or a federal or provincial government in Canada publicly 
announces that the Bank has accepted or agreed to accept a capital injection. In such an event, each note is convertible into common shares pursuant to an automatic 
conversion formula with a multiplier of 1.5 and a conversion price based on the greater of: (i) a floor price of $5.00 and (ii) the current market price of our common shares 
based on the volume weighted average trading price of our common shares on the Toronto Stock Exchange. The number of shares issued is determined by dividing the 
par value of the note (including accrued and unpaid interest on such note) by the conversion price and then times the multiplier. 

(3)  On November 1, 2022, we redeemed all TT$300 million of outstanding 4.75% subordinated debentures due on November 1, 2027 for 100% of their principal amount plus 

(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
(11) 

interest accrued to, but excluding, the redemption date. 
Interest at stated interest rate until earliest par value redemption date, and thereafter at a rate of 0.98% above the 3-month CDOR. 
Interest at stated interest rate until earliest par value redemption date, and thereafter at a rate of 0.89% above the 3-month CDOR. 
Interest at stated interest rate until earliest par value redemption date, and thereafter at a rate of 1.31% above the 3-month CDOR. 
Interest at stated interest rate until earliest par value redemption date, and thereafter at a rate of 0.61% above the 3-month CDOR. 
Interest at stated interest rate until earliest par value redemption date, and thereafter at a rate of 0.76% above the 3-month CDOR. 
Interest at stated interest rate until earliest par value redemption date, and thereafter at a rate of 0.55% above the 3-month CDOR. 
Interest at a rate of 0.40% above the 30-day Bankers’ Acceptance rate. 
Interest at a rate of 0.25% above the U.S. dollar 3-month London Interbank Mean Rate (LIMEAN). In the event of a reduction of the annual dividend we declare on our 
common shares, the interest payable on the debentures is reduced pro rata to the dividend reduction and the interest reduction is payable with the proceeds from the 
sale of newly issued common shares. 

All redemptions, cancellations and exchanges of subordinated debentures are subject to the consent and approval of OSFI. 

Maturity schedule 
The aggregate maturities of subordinated debentures, based on the maturity dates under the terms of issue, are as follows: 

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Within 1 year  
1 to 5 years  
5 to 10 years  
Thereafter  
  

As at  

October 31  
2022  
110  
1,884  
6,706  
1,336  
10,036  

$

$

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

209 

Note 20 Equity  

Share capital 
Authorized share capital 
Preferred – An unlimited number of First Preferred Shares and Second Preferred Shares without nominal or par value, issuable in 
series; the aggregate consideration for which all the First Preferred Shares and all the Second Preferred Shares that may be 
issued may not exceed $20 billion and $5 billion, respectively. 

Common – An unlimited number of shares without nominal or par value may be issued. 

Outstanding share capital 
The following table details our common and preferred shares and other equity instruments outstanding. 

  

October 31, 2022  

  

October 31, 2021  

As at and for the year ended  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except the number  
of shares and as otherwise noted)  
Common shares issued  
Balance at beginning of period  

Issued in connection with share-based  

compensation plans (1)  

Purchased for cancellation (2)  

Balance at end of period  

Treasury – common shares  
Balance at beginning of period (3)  

Purchases  
Sales  

Balance at end of period (3)  

Common shares outstanding  

Preferred shares and other equity  

instruments issued  
First preferred (4)  

Non-cumulative, fixed rate  

Non-cumulative, 5-Year Rate Reset  

Series BH  
Series BI  
Series BJ (5)  

Series AZ  
Series BB  
Series BD  
Series BF  
Series BO  
Series BT (6)  

Series C-2  

Series 1 (8)  
Series 2 (8)  
Series 3 (8)  
  

Non-cumulative, fixed rate/floating rate  

Other equity instruments  

Limited recourse capital notes (LRCNs) (7)  

Number of  
shares  
Amount  
(thousands)  
  
  
1,425,187   $ 17,728  

Dividends  
declared  
per share    
    
    

Number of  
shares  
Amount  
(thousands)  
  
  
1,423,861   $ 17,628  

Dividends  
declared  
per share  
  
  

  

  
  
  

1,270  
(40,866)  

99  
(509)  

1,385,591   $ 17,318  

(662)   $

(48,437)  
46,419  

  
(73)  
(5,183)  
4,922  

(2,680)   $

(334)  

1,382,911   $ 16,984  

    
    
$  4.96    
    
    
    
    
    
    

6,000   $
6,000  
–  
  
20,000  
20,000  
24,000  
12,000  
14,000  
750  
  
15  
  
  
1,750  
1,250  
1,000  

  
  
  
150   $
150  
–  
  
500  
500  
600  
300  
350  
750  
  

    
    
    
1.23    
1.23    
0.33    
    
0.93    
0.91    
0.80    
0.75    
1.20    
4.20%    
    
23   US$ 67.50    
    
    
4.50%    
4.00%    
3.65%    
    

  
  
1,750  
1,250  
1,000  

1,326  
–  

100  
–  

1,425,187   $ 17,728  

$  4.32  

(1,388)   $

(37,603)  
38,329  

  
(129)  
(4,060)  
4,116  

(662)   $

(73)  

1,424,525   $ 17,655  

  

  
  
  

  
  
  
150   $
150  
150  
  
500  
500  
600  
300  
350  
–  
  

  
  
  
1.23  
1.23  
1.31  
  
0.93  
0.91  
0.80  
0.75  
1.20  
–  
  
23   US$ 67.50  
  
  
4.50%  
4.00%  
3.65%  

  
  
1,750  
1,250  
1,000  

6,000   $
6,000  
6,000  
  
20,000  
20,000  
24,000  
12,000  
14,000  
–  
  
15  
  
  
1,750  
1,250  
1,000  

Treasury – preferred shares and other  

equity instruments  

Balance at beginning of period (3)  

Purchases  
Sales  

Balance at end of period (3)  

Preferred shares and other equity  

instruments outstanding  

106,765   $ 7,323  

112,015   $ 6,723  

  

(164)   $

(2,811)  
2,963  

(12)   $

  
(39)  
(518)  
552  

(5)  

  
(2)   $

(6,306)  
6,144  

  
(3)  
(683)  
647  

(164)   $

(39)  

    
    
    
    
    

    

106,753   $ 7,318  

111,851   $ 6,684  

Includes fair value adjustments to stock options of $6 million (October 31, 2021 – $11 million). 

(1) 
(2)  During the year ended October 31, 2022, we purchased common shares for cancellation at an average cost of $132.80 per share with a book value of $12.47 per share. 

(3) 
(4) 

During the year ended October 31, 2021, we did not purchase for cancellation any common shares. 
Positive amounts represent a short position and negative amounts represent a long position. 
First Preferred Shares were issued at $25 per share with the exception of Non-Cumulative 5-Year Rate Reset First Preferred Shares Series BT (Series BT) and 
Non-Cumulative Fixed Rate/Floating Rate First Preferred Shares Series C-2 (Series C-2) which were issued at $1,000 and US$1,000 per share (equivalent to US$25 per 
depositary share), respectively. 

(5)  On February 24, 2022, we redeemed all 6 million of our issued and outstanding Non-Cumulative Fixed Rate First Preferred Shares Series BJ at a price of $25.75 per share. 
(6)  On November 5, 2021, we issued 750 thousand Non-Cumulative 5-Year Rate Reset First Preferred Shares Series BT, totalling $750 million. 
(7) 

Each series of LRCNs (LRCN Series) were issued at a $1,000 per note. The number of shares represent the number of notes issued and the dividends declared per share 
represent the annual interest rate percentage applicable to the notes issued as at the reporting date. 
In connection with the issuance of LRCN Series 1, we issued $1,750 million of Non-Cumulative 5-Year Rate Reset First Preferred Shares Series BQ (Series BQ); in 
connection with the issuance of LRCN Series 2, we issued $1,250 million of Non-Cumulative 5-Year Rate Reset First Preferred Shares Series BR (Series BR); in connection 
with the issuance of LRCN Series 3, we issued $1,000 million of Non-Cumulative 5-Year Rate Reset First Preferred Shares Series BS (Series BS). The Series BQ, BR and BS 
preferred shares were issued at a price of $1,000 per share and were issued to a consolidated trust to be held as trust assets in connection with each respective 
LRCN Series. 

(8) 

210

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

  
  

  
  
  
  

  

  

  

  
  
  
  

  

  

Significant terms and conditions of preferred shares and other equity instruments 

As at October 31, 2022  

Preferred shares  
First preferred  

Non-cumulative, fixed rate  

Non-cumulative, 5-Year  

Series BH (4)  
Series BI (4)  

Rate Reset (5)  
Series AZ (4)  
Series BB (4)  
Series BD (4)  
Series BF (4)  
Series BO (4)  
Series BT (4)  

Non-cumulative, fixed rate/

floating rate  
Series C-2 (6)  
Other equity instruments  

Limited recourse capital  

notes (7)  

Series 1 (8)  
Series 2 (9)  
Series 3 (10)  

Current  
annual yield  

Premium  

Current  
dividend  
per share (1)  

Earliest  
redemption  
date (2)  

  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  

  
  
  
.306250   November 24, 2020  
.306250   November 24, 2020  

$

Issue date  

  
  
  
June 5, 2015  
July 22, 2015  

  
2.21%  
2.26%  
2.74%  
2.62%  
2.38%  
2.71%  

  
  
May 24, 2019  
.231250  
August 24, 2019  
.228125  
.200000  
May 24, 2020  
.187500   November 24, 2020  
.300000  
21.000000  

  
January 30, 2014  
June 3, 2014  
January 30, 2015  
March 13, 2015  
February 24, 2024   November 2, 2018  
February 24, 2027   November 5, 2021  

  
  
  
4.90%  
4.90%  

  
3.70%  
3.65%  
3.20%  
3.60%  
4.80%  
4.20%  

Redemption  
price (2), (3)  

  
  
  
26.00  
26.00  

$

  
25.00  
25.00  
25.00  
25.00  
25.00  
1,000.00  

  

  
  
6.75%   4.052%   US$16.875000  
  
  

  

  
November 7, 2023   November 2, 2015   US$1,000.00  
  

  

  

  

  

  

  
4.50%   4.137%  
4.00%   3.617%  
3.65%   2.665%  

  
n.a.  
n.a.  
n.a.  

  
  
October 24, 2025  
July 28, 2020  
January 24, 2026   November 2, 2020  
June 8, 2021  
October 24, 2026  

  
$1,000.00  
1,000.00  
1,000.00  

(1)  With the exception of Series BT, non-cumulative preferential dividends of each Series are payable quarterly, as and when declared by the Board of Directors, on or about 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8) 

(9) 

the 24th day (7th day for Series C-2) of February, May, August and November. In the case of Series BT, non-cumulative preferential dividends are payable semi-annually, 
as and when declared by the Board of Directors. 
Subject to the consent of OSFI and the requirements of the Bank Act (Canada), we may, on or after the dates specified above, redeem First Preferred Shares. In the case 
of Series AZ, BB, BD, BF, and BO, these may be redeemed for cash at a price per share of $25 if redeemed on the earliest redemption date and on the same date every fifth 
year thereafter. In the case of BH and BI, these may be redeemed for cash at a price per share of $26 if redeemed during the 12 months commencing on the earliest 
redemption date and decreasing by $0.25 each 12-month period thereafter to a price per share of $25 if redeemed four years from the earliest redemption date or 
thereafter. Series BT may be redeemed for cash at a price per share of $1,000 if redeemed on the earliest redemption date and on the same date every fifth year 
thereafter. Series C-2 may be redeemed at a price of US$1,000 on the earliest redemption date and any dividend payment date thereafter. 
Subject to the consent of OSFI and the requirements of the Bank Act (Canada), we may purchase the First Preferred Shares of each Series for cancellation at the lowest 
price or prices at which, in the opinion of the Board of Directors, such shares are obtainable. 
The preferred shares include NVCC provisions, necessary for the shares to qualify as Tier 1 regulatory capital under Basel III. NVCC provisions require the conversion of 
the instrument into a variable number of common shares in the event that OSFI deems the Bank non-viable or a federal or provincial government in Canada publicly 
announces that the Bank has accepted or agreed to accept a capital injection. In such an event, each preferred share is convertible into common shares pursuant to an 
automatic conversion formula with a multiplier of 1 and with a conversion price based on the greater of: (i) a floor price of $5 and (ii) the current market price of our 
common shares based on the volume weighted average trading price of our common shares on the Toronto Stock Exchange. The number of shares issued is determined 
by dividing the preferred share value by the conversion price. 
The dividend rate will reset on the earliest redemption date and every fifth year thereafter at a rate equal to the 5-year Government of Canada bond yield plus the 
premium indicated. The holders have the option to convert their shares into non-cumulative floating rate First Preferred Shares subject to certain conditions on the 
earliest redemption date and every fifth year thereafter at a rate equal to the three-month Government of Canada Treasury Bill rate plus the premium indicated. 
The dividend rate will change on the earliest redemption date at a rate equal to the 3-month LIBOR plus the premium indicated. Series C-2 do not qualify as Tier 1 
regulatory capital. 
The current annual yield on each LRCN Series represents the annual interest rate applicable to the notes issued as at the reporting date. The payments of interest and 
principal in cash on the LRCN Series are made at our discretion, and non-payment of interest and principal in cash does not constitute an event of default. In the event of 
(i) non-payment of interest on any interest payment date, (ii) non-payment of the redemption price in case of a redemption of a LRCN Series, (iii) non-payment of 
principal at the maturity of a LRCN Series, or (iv) an event of default on a LRCN Series, holders of such LRCN Series will have recourse only to the assets (Trust Assets) 
held by a third-party trustee in a consolidated trust in respect of such LRCN Series and each such noteholder will be entitled to receive its pro rata share of the Trust 
Assets. In such an event, the delivery of the Trust Assets for each LRCN Series will represent the full and complete extinguishment of our obligations under the related 
LRCN Series. The LRCNs include NVCC provisions, necessary for the shares to qualify as Tier 1 regulatory capital under Basel III. NVCC provisions require the conversion 
of the instrument into a variable number of common shares in the event that OSFI deems the Bank non-viable or a federal or provincial government in Canada publicly 
announces that the Bank has accepted or agreed to accept a capital injection. In such an event, each note is automatically redeemed and the redemption price will be 
satisfied by the delivery of Trust Assets, which will consist of common shares pursuant to an automatic conversion of the series of preferred shares that were issued 
concurrently with the related LRCN Series. Each series of preferred shares include an automatic conversion formula with a conversion price based on the greater of: (i) a 
floor price of $5 and (ii) the current market price of our common shares based on the volume weighted average trading price of our common shares on the Toronto Stock 
Exchange. The number of common shares issued in respect of each series of preferred shares will be determined by dividing the preferred share value ($1,000 plus 
declared and unpaid dividends) by the conversion price. The number of common shares delivered to each noteholder will be based on such noteholder’s pro rata interest 
in the Trust Assets. Subject to the consent of OSFI, we may purchase LRCNs for cancellation at such price or prices and upon such terms and conditions as we in our 
absolute discretion may determine, subject to any applicable law restricting the purchase of notes. 
LRCN Series 1 bear interest at a fixed rate of 4.5% per annum until November 24, 2025, and thereafter at a rate per annum, reset every fifth year, equal to the 5-Year 
Government of Canada Yield plus 4.137% until maturity on November 24, 2080. The interest is paid semi-annually on or about the 24th day of May and November. LRCN 
Series 1 is redeemable during the period from October 24 to and including November 24, commencing in 2025 and every fifth year thereafter to the extent we redeem 
Series BQ pursuant to their terms and subject to the consent of OSFI and requirements of the Bank Act (Canada). 
LRCN Series 2 bear interest at a fixed rate of 4.0% per annum until February 24, 2026, and thereafter at a rate per annum, reset every fifth year, equal to the 5-Year 
Government of Canada Yield plus 3.617% until maturity on February 24, 2081. The interest is paid semi-annually on or about the 24th day of February and August. LRCN 
Series 2 is redeemable during the period from January 24 to and including February 24, commencing in 2026 and every fifth year thereafter to the extent we redeem Series 
BR pursuant to their terms and subject to the consent of OSFI and requirements of the Bank Act (Canada). 

(10)  LRCN Series 3 bear interest at a fixed rate of 3.65% per annum until November 24, 2026, and thereafter at a rate per annum, reset every fifth year, equal to the 5-Year 

Government of Canada Yield plus 2.665% until maturity on November 24, 2081. The interest is paid semi-annually on or about the 24th day of May and November. LRCN 
Series 3 is redeemable during the period from October 24 to and including November 24, commencing in 2026 and every fifth year thereafter to the extent we redeem 
Series BS pursuant to their terms and subject to the consent of OSFI and requirements of the Bank Act (Canada). 

n.a.  not applicable 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

211 

Note 20 Equity (continued)  

Restrictions on the payment of dividends 
We are prohibited by the Bank Act (Canada) from declaring any dividends on our preferred or common shares when we are, or 
would be placed as a result of the declaration, in contravention of the capital adequacy and liquidity regulations or any 
regulatory directives issued under the Act. We may not pay dividends on our common shares at any time unless all dividends to 
which preferred shareholders are then entitled have been declared and paid or set apart for payment. 

Currently, these limitations do not restrict the payment of dividends on our preferred or common shares. 

Dividend reinvestment plan 
Our dividend reinvestment plan (DRIP) provides common and preferred shareholders with a means to receive additional 
common shares rather than cash dividends. The plan is only open to shareholders residing in Canada or the U.S. The 
requirements of our DRIP are satisfied through either open market share purchases or shares issued from treasury. During 2022 
and 2021, the requirements of our DRIP were satisfied through open market share purchases. 

Shares available for future issuances 
As at October 31, 2022, 42.7 million common shares are available for future issue relating to our DRIP and potential exercise of 
stock options and awards outstanding. In addition, we may issue up to 38.9 million common shares from treasury under the RBC 
Umbrella Savings and Securities Purchase Plan that was approved by shareholders on February 26, 2009. 

Note 21 Share-based compensation  

Stock option plans 
We have stock option plans for certain key employees. Under the plans, options are periodically granted to purchase common 
shares. The exercise price for the majority of the grants is determined as the higher of the volume-weighted average of the 
trading prices per board lot (100 shares) of our common shares on the Toronto Stock Exchange (i) on the day preceding the day 
of grant; and (ii) the five consecutive trading days immediately preceding the day of grant. The exercise price for the remaining 
grants is the closing market share price of our common shares on the New York Stock Exchange on the date of grant. All options 
vest over a four-year period, and are exercisable for a period not exceeding 10 years from the grant date. 

The compensation expense recorded for the year ended October 31, 2022, in respect of the stock option plans was $8 million 

(October 31, 2021 – $6 million). The compensation expense related to non-vested options was $4 million at October 31, 2022 
(October 31, 2021 – $3 million), to be recognized over the weighted average period of 2.0 years (October 31, 2021 – 2.0 years). 

Analysis of the movement in the number and weighted average exercise price of options is set out below: 

A summary of our stock option activity and related information 

  

  

  

  

(Canadian dollars per share except share amounts)  
Outstanding at beginning of period  
Granted  
Exercised (2), (3)  
Forfeited in the period  

Outstanding at end of period  

Exercisable at end of period  

October 31, 2022  

  

October 31, 2021  

For the year ended  

Number of  
options  
(thousands)  

Weighted  
average  

exercise price (1)    
92.27    
129.99    
73.98    
104.28    

100.07    

87.15    

7,055   $
1,184  
(684)  
(46)  

7,509   $

3,502   $

Number of  
options  
(thousands)  

Weighted  
average  
exercise price (1)  
86.02  
106.00  
65.56  
93.23  

92.27  

80.38  

6,973   $
1,251  
(1,150)  
(19)  

7,055   $

3,273   $

(1) 

The weighted average exercise prices reflect the conversion of foreign currency-denominated options at the exchange rates as of October 31, 2022 and October 31, 2021. 
For foreign currency-denominated options exercised during the year, the weighted average exercise prices are translated using exchange rates as at the settlement date. 

(2)  Cash received for options exercised during the year was $51 million (October 31, 2021 – $75 million) and the weighted average share price at the date of exercise was 

$134.10 (October 31, 2021 – $115.11). 

(3)  New shares were issued for all stock options exercised in 2022 and 2021. 

Options outstanding as at October 31, 2022 by range of exercise price 

(Canadian dollars per share except  
share amounts and years)  
$48.22 – $74.39  
$78.28 – $90.23  
$96.55 – $102.33  
$104.70 – $106.00  
$129.99  

Options outstanding  

  

Options exercisable  

Number  
outstanding  
(thousands)  

Weighted  
average  
exercise price (1)  
70.05  
86.99  
98.90  
105.40  
129.99  

890   $

1,409  
1,743  
2,299  
1,168  

Weighted  
average  
remaining  
contractual  
life (years)    
2.31    
3.54    
5.19    
7.66    
9.12    

Number  
exercisable  
(thousands)  

Weighted  
average  
exercise price (1)  
70.05  
86.99  
99.96  
–  
–  

890   $

1,409  
1,203  
–  
–  

7,509   $

100.07  

5.91    

3,502   $

87.15  

(1) 

The weighted average exercise prices reflect the conversion of foreign currency-denominated options at the exchange rate as of October 31, 2022. 

212

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

The weighted average fair value of options granted during the year ended October 31, 2022 was estimated at $7.80 (October 31, 
2021 – $4.65). This was determined by applying the Black-Scholes model on the date of grant, taking into account the specific 
terms and conditions under which the options are granted, such as the vesting period and expected share price volatility 
estimated by considering the historic average share price volatility over a historical period corresponding to the expected option 
life. The following assumptions were used to determine the fair value of options granted: 

Weighted average assumptions 

  

(Canadian dollars per share except percentages and years)  
Share price at grant date  
Risk-free interest rate  
Expected dividend yield  
Expected share price volatility  
Expected life of option  

For the year ended  

October 31  
2022  

October 31  
2021  
$ 128.48   $ 104.86  
0.48%  
4.59%  
14%  
6 Years  

1.25%  
3.66%  
13%  
6 Years  

Employee savings and share ownership plans 
We offer many employees an opportunity to own our common shares through savings and share ownership plans. Under these 
plans, the employees can generally contribute between 1% and 10% of their annual salary or benefit base for commission-based 
employees. For each contribution between 1% and 6%, we will match 50% of the employee contributions in our common shares. 
For the RBC Dominion Securities Savings Plan, our maximum annual contribution is $4,500 per employee. For the RBC U.K. Share 
Incentive Plan, our maximum annual contribution is £1,500 per employee. For the year ended October 31, 2022, we contributed 
$128 million (October 31, 2021 – $123 million), under the terms of these plans, towards the purchase of our common shares. As at 
October 31, 2022, an aggregate of 36 million common shares were held under these plans (October 31, 2021 – 36 million common 
shares). 

Deferred share and other plans 
We offer deferred share unit plans to executives, certain key employees and non-employee directors of the Bank. Under these 
plans, participants may choose to receive all or a percentage of their annual variable short-term incentive bonus, commission, or 
directors’ fee in the form of deferred share units (DSUs). The participants must elect to participate in the plan prior to the 
beginning of the year. DSUs earn dividend equivalents in the form of additional DSUs at the same rate as dividends on common 
shares. The participant is not allowed to convert the DSUs until retirement or termination of employment/directorship. The cash 
value of the DSUs is equivalent to the market value of common shares when conversion takes place. 

We also offer unit awards for certain key employees within Capital Markets. The bonus is invested as RBC share units and a 

specified percentage vests on a specified number of anniversary dates each year. Each vested amount is paid in cash and is 
based on the original number of share units granted plus accumulated dividends, valued using the average closing price of RBC 
common shares during the five trading days immediately preceding the vesting date. 

We offer performance deferred share award plans to certain key employees, all of which vest at the end of three years. Upon 

vesting, the award is paid in cash and is based on the original number of RBC share units granted plus accumulated dividends 
valued using the average closing price of RBC common shares during the five trading days immediately preceding the vesting 
date. A portion of the award under certain plans may be increased or decreased up to 25%, depending on our total shareholder 
return compared to a defined peer group of global financial institutions. 

We maintain non-qualified deferred compensation plans for certain key employees in the U.S. These plans allow eligible 
employees to defer a portion of their annual income and a variety of productivity and recruitment bonuses and allocate the 
deferrals among specified fund choices, including a RBC Share Accounted fund that tracks the value of our common shares. 

The following table presents the units granted under the deferred share and other plans for the year. 

Units granted under deferred share and other plans 

  

  

  

(Units and per unit amounts)  

Deferred share unit plans  
Capital Markets compensation plan unit awards  
Performance deferred share award plans  
Deferred compensation plans  
Other share-based plans  

For the year ended   

October 31, 2022  

  

October 31, 2021  

Units  
granted  
(thousands)  

Weighted  
average  
fair value  

Units  
granted  
(thousands)  

Weighted  
average  
fair value  
per unit  

per unit     
469   $ 131.49     
125.22     
129.65     
135.44     
128.50     

3,794  
2,220  
92  
1,083  

462   $

4,066  
2,486  
87  
767  

113.34  
128.95  
106.10  
104.21  
109.24  

7,658   $ 127.48     

7,868   $

118.62  

Our liabilities for the awards granted under the deferred share and other plans are measured at fair value, determined based on 
the quoted market price of our common shares and specified fund choices as applicable. Annually, our obligation is increased by 
additional units earned by plan participants, and is reduced by forfeitures, cancellations, and the settlement of vested units. In 
addition, our obligation is impacted by fluctuations in the market price of our common shares and specified fund units. For 
performance deferred share award plans, the estimated outcome of meeting the performance conditions also impacts our 
obligation. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

213 

Note 21 Share-based compensation (continued)  

The following tables present the units that have been earned by the participants, our obligations for these earned units 

under the deferred share and other plans, and the related compensation expenses (recoveries) recognized for the year. 

Obligations under deferred share and other plans 

(Millions of Canadian dollars except units)  
Deferred share unit plans  
Capital Markets compensation plan unit awards  
Performance deferred share award plans  
Deferred compensation plans (1)  
Other share-based plans  
  

(1) 

Excludes obligations not determined based on the quoted market price of our common shares. 

Compensation expenses recognized under deferred share and other plans 

October 31, 2022  

  

October 31, 2021  

As at

  

Units  
(thousands)  

Carrying  
amount    
684    
1,182    
757    
319    
218    
3,160    

Units  
(thousands)  
5,001  
9,925  
6,216  
2,574  
1,724  
25,440  

5,429   $ 
9,398  
6,006  
2,537  
1,772  

25,142   $

Carrying  
amount  
644  
$
1,280  
801  
331  
216  
$ 3,272  

  

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Deferred share unit plans  
Capital Markets compensation plan unit awards  
Performance deferred share award plans  
Deferred compensation plans  
Other share-based plans  
  

Note 22 Income taxes  

Components of tax expense 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Income taxes (recoveries) in Consolidated Statements of Income  
Current tax  

Tax expense for current year  
Adjustments for prior years  
Recoveries arising from previously unrecognized tax loss, tax credit or temporary difference  

Origination and reversal of temporary difference  
Effects of changes in tax rates  
Adjustments for prior years  
Recoveries arising from previously unrecognized tax loss, tax credit or temporary difference of a prior  

of a prior period  

  

Deferred tax  

period, net  

  

  

Other comprehensive income  

income  

Income taxes (recoveries) in Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income and Changes in Equity  

Net unrealized gains (losses) on debt securities and loans at fair value through other comprehensive  

Provision for credit losses recognized in income  
Reclassification of net losses (gains) on debt securities and loans at fair value through other  

comprehensive income to income  

Unrealized foreign currency translation gains (losses)  
Net foreign currency translation gains (losses) from hedging activities  
Reclassification of losses (gains) on net investment hedging activities to income  
Net gains (losses) on derivatives designated as cash flow hedges  
Reclassification of losses (gains) on derivatives designated as cash flow hedges to income  
Remeasurements of employee benefit plans  
Net fair value change due to credit risk on financial liabilities designated at fair value through profit  

or loss  

Net gains (losses) on equity securities designated at fair value through other comprehensive income  

Share-based compensation awards  
Distributions on other equity instruments and issuance costs  

  

Total income taxes  

214

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

For the year ended  

October 31  
2022  

20   $

October 31  
2021  
205  
518  
506  
627  
142  
333   $ 1,998  

210  
273  
(261)  
91  

$

$

For the year ended  

October 31  
2022  
  
  
$ 4,151  
(230)  

October 31  
2021  
  
  
$ 4,893  
(92)  

–  
3,921  
  
232  
4  
231  

(86)  
381  
4,302  
  
  

(633)  
(2)  

2  
2  
(478)  
6  
628  
70  
287  

(16)  
4,785  
  
(216)  
(4)  
74  

(58)  
(204)  
4,581  
  
  

(35)  
–  

(28)  
1  
591  
–  
485  
97  
796  

622  
(3)  
10  
(45)  
466  
$ 4,768  

20  
17  
(17)  
(42)  
1,885  
$ 6,466  

The effective income tax rate of 21.4% decreased 80 bps, primarily due to higher tax-exempt income and an increase in income 
from lower tax rate jurisdictions in the current year. 

The following is an analysis of the differences between the income tax expense reflected in the Consolidated Statements of 

Income and the amounts calculated at the Canadian statutory rate. 

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except for percentage amounts)  

October 31, 2022  

October 31, 2021  

Reconciliation to statutory tax rate 

Income taxes at Canadian statutory tax rate  
Increase (decrease) in income taxes resulting from:  
Lower average tax rate applicable to subsidiaries  
Tax-exempt income from securities  
Tax rate change  
Other  

For the year ended  

$ 5,269  
  
(428)  
(437)  
4  
(106)  

26.2%  

  
(2.1)  
(2.2)  
–  
(0.5)  

$ 5,405  
  
(361)  
(379)  
(4)  
(80)  

26.2%  

  
(1.8)  
(1.8)  
–  
(0.4)  

Income taxes in Consolidated Statements of Income / effective tax rate  

$ 4,302  

21.4%  

$ 4,581  

22.2%  

Deferred tax assets and liabilities result from tax loss and tax credit carryforwards and temporary differences between the tax 
basis of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 

Significant components of deferred tax assets and liabilities 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Net deferred tax asset/(liability)  

Allowance for credit losses  
Deferred compensation  
Business realignment charges  
Tax loss and tax credit carryforwards  
Deferred (income) expense  
Financial instruments measured at  

fair value through other  
comprehensive income  
Premises and equipment and  

intangibles  

Pension and post-employment  

related  

Other  

Comprising  

Deferred tax assets  
Deferred tax liabilities  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Net deferred tax asset/(liability)  

Allowance for credit losses  
Deferred compensation  
Business realignment charges  
Tax loss and tax credit carryforwards  
Deferred (income) expense  
Financial instruments measured at  

$

fair value through other  
comprehensive income  
Premises and equipment and  

intangibles  

Pension and post-employment  

related  

Other  

Comprising  

Deferred tax assets  
Deferred tax liabilities  

As at and for the year ended October 31, 2022  

Net asset  
beginning of  
period  
  
974   $

Change  
through  
equity  
  
–   $

Change  
through  
profit or loss  
  
2   $

Exchange  
rate  
differences  
  
11   $

$

1,614  
11  
242  
110  

(10)  
–  
–  
(1)  

(211)  
1  
67  
(126)  

101  
–  
2  
23  

Acquisitions/  

disposals   Other  
  
  
–   $
–   $
–  
–  
3  
–  

10  
–  
8  
–  

Net asset  
end of  
period  
  
987  
1,504  
12  
322  
6  

(19)  

(2)  

5  

–  

(16)  

(836)  

(57)  

(345)  

(1,234)  

–  

–  

(163)  
4  

(287)  
22  

1,937   $ (278)  $

19  
(137)  
(381)  $

4  
(6)  
83   $

(8)  
4  
(331)  $

(435)  
–  
–  
(113)  
3   $ 1,033  

  
  
  
  

  
  
   $ 1,472  
  
(439)  
   $ 1,033  

  
As at and for the year ended October 31, 2021  

Net asset  
beginning of  
period  
  

Change  
through  
equity  
  
–   $

Change  
through  
profit or loss  
  

  
  
Acquisitions/  

Exchange  
rate  
differences  
  
(16)  $
(68)  
–  
(2)  
3  

disposals   Other  
  
  
–   $
–   $
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  
–  

Net asset  
end of  
period  
  
974  
1,614  
11  
242  
110  

  

  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  

17  
–  
–  
6  

45  

–  

$

$

$

$

$

$

  
2,011  
(74)  
1,937  

1,362   $
1,269  
9  
204  
(104)  

(68)  

(784)  

  
2,579  
(52)  
2,527  

592  
47  

(796)  
(12)  

2,527   $ (740)  $

–  

4  

  
  
  
  

(372)  $
396  
2  
40  
205  

(1)  

(82)  

45  
(29)  
204   $

  
  
  
  

–  
–  
–   $

–  
(5)  
(5)  $

–  

–  

  
   $
  
   $

(19)  

(836)  

(163)  
4  
1,937  

  
2,011  
(74)  
1,937  

–  

  

  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  

5  

30  

(4)  
3  
(49)  $

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

215 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Note 22 Income taxes (continued)  

The tax loss and tax credit carryforwards amount of deferred tax assets primarily relates to losses and tax credits in our 
Canadian, U.S., and Caribbean operations. Deferred tax assets of $322 million were recognized at October 31, 2022 (October 31, 
2021 – $242 million) in respect of tax losses and tax credits incurred in current or preceding years for which recognition is 
dependent on the projection of future taxable profits. Management’s forecasts support the assumption that it is probable that 
the results of future operations will generate sufficient taxable income to utilize the deferred tax assets. The forecasts rely on 
continued liquidity and capital support to our business operations, including tax planning strategies implemented in relation to 
such support. 

As at October 31, 2022, unused tax losses and tax credits of $429 million and $130 million (October 31, 2021 – $384 million and 

$207 million) available to be offset against potential tax adjustments or future taxable income were not recognized as deferred 
tax assets. There are no unused tax losses that will expire within one year (October 31, 2021 – $nil), or in two to four years 
(October 31, 2021 – $2 million) and there are $429 million of unused tax losses that will expire after four years (October 31, 2021 – 
$382 million). There are no tax credits that will expire in one year (October 31, 2021 – $nil), $93 million that will expire in two to 
four years (October 31, 2021 – $115 million) and $37 million that will expire after four years (October 31, 2021 – $92 million). 

The amount of temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries, branches and associates and interests in 

joint ventures for which deferred tax liabilities have not been recognized in the parent bank is $26 billion as at October 31, 2022 
(October 31, 2021 – $20 billion). 

Tax examinations and assessments 
During the year, we received a reassessment from the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) in respect of the 2017 taxation year, which 
suggests that Royal Bank of Canada owes additional taxes of approximately $237 million as they denied the deductibility of 
certain dividends. The reassessment received during the year is consistent with the reassessments received for taxation years 
2012 to 2016 of approximately $1,391 million of additional income taxes and the reassessments received for taxation years 2009 to 
2011 of approximately $434 million of additional income taxes and interest in respect of the same matter. These amounts 
represent the maximum additional taxes owing for those years. 

Legislative amendments introduced in the 2015 Canadian Federal Budget resulted in disallowed deduction of dividends from 

transactions with Taxable Canadian Corporations including those hedged with Tax Indifferent Investors, namely pension funds 
and non-resident entities with prospective application effective May 1, 2017. The dividends to which the reassessments relate 
include both dividends in transactions similar to those which are the target of the 2015 legislative amendments and dividends 
which are unrelated to the legislative amendments. 

It is possible that the CRA will reassess us for significant additional income tax for subsequent years on the same basis. In all 

cases, we are confident that our tax filing position was appropriate and intend to defend ourselves vigorously. 

Government of Canada Budget 2022 
On April 7, 2022, the Government of Canada presented its 2022 budget, which included measures focused on ensuring banking 
and life insurers’ groups help pay a portion of the costs of the Canadian federal government’s COVID-19 pandemic response. On 
November 22, 2022, Bill C-32, Fall Economic Statement Implementation Act, 2022 (the Bill) received second reading in the House 
of Commons. The Bill includes a Canada Recovery Dividend (CRD) and a permanent increase in the corporate income tax rate. 
The CRD is a one-time 15% tax for 2022 determined based on the average taxable income above $1 billion for taxation years 2020 
and 2021 and payable in equal installments over five years. The permanent increase in the corporate income tax rate is 1.5% on 
taxable income above $100 million and would apply to taxation years that end after April 7, 2022. 

The Bill is not yet substantively enacted and timing of enactment remains uncertain. Based on the draft legislation, which 
remains subject to amendments prior to enactment, the CRD is expected to reduce net income by approximately $1 billion and 
other comprehensive income by approximately $0.1 billion when substantively enacted. 

Note 23  Earnings per share  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except share and per share amounts)  

Basic earnings per share  

Net income  
Dividends on preferred shares and distributions on other equity instruments  
Net income attributable to non-controlling interests  

Net income available to common shareholders  

Weighted average number of common shares (in thousands)  
Basic earnings per share (in dollars)  

Diluted earnings per share  

Net income available to common shareholders  

Weighted average number of common shares (in thousands)  
Stock options (1)  
Issuable under other share-based compensation plans  

Average number of diluted common shares (in thousands)  
Diluted earnings per share (in dollars)  

$

$

$

$

For the year ended  

October 31  
2022  
  

15,807   $
(247)  
(13)  

October 31  
2021  
  
16,050  
(257)  
(12)  

15,547   $

15,781  

1,403,654  

11.08   $

1,424,343  
11.08  

  

15,547   $

  
15,781  

1,403,654  
1,918  
462  

1,406,034  

$

11.06   $

1,424,343  
1,737  
655  

1,426,735  
11.06  

(1) 

The dilutive effect of stock options was calculated using the treasury stock method. When the exercise price of options outstanding is greater than the average market 
price of our common shares, the options are excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per share. For the year ended October 31, 2022 and the year ended 
October 31, 2021, no outstanding options were excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per share. 

216

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Note 24  Guarantees, commitments, pledged assets and contingencies  

Guarantees and commitments 
We use guarantees and other off-balance sheet credit instruments to meet the financing needs of our clients. 

The table below summarizes our maximum exposure to credit losses related to our guarantees and commitments provided 

to third parties. The maximum exposure to credit risk relating to a guarantee is the maximum risk of loss if there was a total 
default by the guaranteed parties, without consideration of possible recoveries under recourse provisions, insurance policies or 
from collateral held or pledged. The maximum exposure to credit risk relating to a commitment to extend credit is the full amount 
of the commitment. In both cases, the maximum risk exposure is significantly greater than the amount recognized as a liability in 
our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Financial guarantees  

Financial standby letters of credit  

Commitments to extend credit  
Backstop liquidity facilities  
Credit enhancements  
Documentary and commercial letters of credit  
Other commitments to extend credit  

Other credit-related commitments  

Securities lending indemnifications  
Performance guarantees  
Sponsored member guarantees  
Other  

Maximum exposure  
to credit losses  

As at

  

October 31  
2022  
  

October 31  
2021  
  
$ 20,291   $ 16,867  
  
38,405  
2,537  
447  
248,522  
  
99,797  
7,195  
142  
326  

  
45,336  
2,960  
318  
284,602  
  
90,693  
7,333  
1,241  
360  

Our credit review process, our policy for requiring collateral security, and the types of collateral security held are generally the 
same for guarantees and commitments as for loans. Our clients generally have the right to request settlement of, or draw on, our 
guarantees and commitments within one year. However, certain guarantees can only be drawn if specified conditions are met. 
These conditions, along with collateral requirements, are described below. We believe that it is highly unlikely that all or 
substantially all of the guarantees and commitments will be drawn or settled within one year, and contracts may expire without 
being drawn or settled. 

Financial guarantees 
Financial standby letters of credit 
Financial standby letters of credit represent irrevocable assurances that we will make payments in the event that a client cannot 
meet its payment obligations to the third party. For certain guarantees, the guaranteed party can request payment from us even 
though the client has not defaulted on its obligations. These guarantees generally have a term of five to seven years. 

Our policy for requiring collateral security with respect to these instruments and the types of collateral security held is 
generally the same as for loans. When collateral security is taken, it is determined on an account-by-account basis according to 
the risk of the borrower and the specifics of the transaction. Collateral security may include cash, securities and other assets 
pledged. 

Commitments to extend credit 
Backstop liquidity facilities 
Backstop liquidity facilities are provided to ABCP conduit programs administered by us and third parties as an alternative source 
of financing in the event that such programs are unable to access commercial paper markets, or in limited circumstances, when 
predetermined performance measures of the financial assets acquired or financed by these programs are not met. The average 
remaining term of these liquidity facilities is approximately four years. 

The terms of the backstop liquidity facilities do not require us to advance money to these programs in the event of 

bankruptcy or insolvency and generally do not require us to purchase non-performing or defaulted assets. 

Credit enhancements 
We provide partial credit enhancement to multi-seller ABCP programs administered by us to protect commercial paper investors 
in the event that the collections on the underlying assets together with the transaction-specific credit enhancements or the 
liquidity facilities prove to be insufficient to pay for maturing commercial paper. Each of the asset pools is structured to achieve 
a high investment grade credit profile through credit enhancements required to be provided by the third-party sellers related to 
each transaction. The average remaining term of these credit facilities is approximately three years. 

Documentary and commercial letters of credit 
Documentary and commercial letters of credit, which are written undertakings by us on behalf of a client authorizing a third party 
to draw drafts on us up to a stipulated amount under specific terms and conditions, where some are collateralized based on the 
underlying agreement with the client and others are collateralized by cash deposits or other assets of the client. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

217 

Note 24  Guarantees, commitments, pledged assets and contingencies (continued)   

Other commitments to extend credit 
Commitments to extend credit represent unused portions of authorizations to extend credit in the form of loans, reverse 
repurchase agreements, bankers’ acceptances or letters of credit where we do not have the ability to unilaterally withdraw the 
credit extended to the borrower. 

Other credit-related commitments 
Securities lending indemnifications 
In securities lending transactions, we act as an agent for the owner of a security, who agrees to lend the security to a borrower 
for a fee, under the terms of a pre-arranged contract. The borrower must fully collateralize the security loaned at all times. As 
part of this custodial business, an indemnification may be provided to securities lending customers to ensure that the fair value 
of securities loaned will be returned in the event that the borrower fails to return the borrowed securities and the collateral held 
is insufficient to cover the fair value of those securities. These indemnifications normally terminate without being drawn upon. 
The term of these indemnifications varies, as the securities loaned are recallable on demand. Collateral held for our securities 
lending transactions typically includes cash, securities that are issued or guaranteed by the Canadian government, U.S. 
government or other OECD countries or high quality debt or equity instruments. 

Performance guarantees 
Performance guarantees represent irrevocable assurances that we will make payments to third-party beneficiaries in the event 
that a client fails to perform under a specified non-financial contractual obligation. Such obligations typically include works and 
service contracts, performance bonds, and warranties related to international trade. The term of these guarantees can range up 
to three to seven years. 

Our policy for requiring collateral security with respect to these instruments and the types of collateral security held is 
generally the same as for loans. When collateral security is taken, it is determined on an account-by-account basis according to 
the risk of the borrower and the specifics of the transaction. Collateral security may include cash, securities and other assets 
pledged. 

Sponsored member guarantees 
For certain overnight repurchase and reverse repurchase transactions, we act as a sponsoring member to eligible clients to clear 
transactions through the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation (FICC). We also provide a guarantee to FICC for the prompt and full 
payment and performance of our sponsored member clients’ respective obligations under the FICC rules. The guarantees are 
fully collateralized by cash and securities issued or guaranteed by the U.S. government. 

Indemnifications 
In the normal course of our operations, we provide indemnifications which are often standard contractual terms to 
counterparties in transactions such as purchase and sale contracts, fiduciary, agency, licensing, custodial and service 
agreements, clearing system arrangements, participation as a member of exchanges, director/officer contracts and leasing 
transactions. These indemnification agreements may require us to compensate the counterparties for costs incurred as a result 
of changes in laws and regulations (including tax legislation) or as a result of litigation claims or statutory sanctions that may be 
suffered by the counterparty as a consequence of the transaction. The terms of these indemnification agreements vary based on 
the contract. The nature of the indemnification agreements prevents us from making a reasonable estimate of the maximum 
potential amount we could be required to pay to counterparties. Historically, we have not made any significant payments under 
such indemnifications. 

Uncommitted amounts 
Uncommitted amounts represent undrawn credit facilities for which we have the ability to unilaterally withdraw the credit 
extended to the borrower at any time. These include both retail and commercial commitments. As at October 31, 2022, the total 
balance of uncommitted amounts was $363 billion (October 31, 2021 – $333 billion). 

Other commitments 
We invest in private companies, directly or through third-party investment funds, including Small Business Investment 
Companies, real estate funds and Low Income Housing Tax Credit funds. These funds are generally structured as closed-end 
limited partnerships wherein we hold a limited partner interest. For the year ended October 31, 2022, we have unfunded 
commitments of $1,421 million (October 31, 2021 – $1,396 million) representing the aggregate amount of cash we are obligated to 
contribute as capital to these partnerships under the terms of the relevant contracts. 

Pledged assets and collateral 
In the ordinary course of business, we pledge assets and enter into collateral agreements with terms and conditions that are 
usual and customary to our regular lending, borrowing and trading activities recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. The 
following are examples of our general terms and conditions on pledged assets and collateral: 

(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)

(cid:129)

The risks and rewards of the pledged assets reside with the pledgor. 
The pledged asset is returned to the pledgor when the necessary conditions have been satisfied. 
The right of the pledgee to sell or re-pledge the asset is dependent on the specific agreement under which the collateral 
is pledged. 
If there is no default, the pledgee must return the comparable asset to the pledgor upon satisfaction of the obligation. 

218

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

We are also required to provide intraday pledges to the Bank of Canada when we use a real-time electronic wire transfer system 
that continuously processes all Canadian dollar large-value or time-critical payments throughout the day. The pledged assets 
earmarked for our Canadian dollar large-value or time-critical payments are normally released back to us at the end of the 
settlement cycle each day. Therefore, the pledged assets amount is not included in the following table. For the year ended 
October 31, 2022, we had on average $2 billion of assets pledged intraday to the Bank of Canada on a daily basis 
(October 31, 2021 – $2 billion). There are infrequent occasions where we are required to take an overnight advance from the Bank 
of Canada to cover a settlement requirement, in which case an equivalent value of the pledged assets would be used to secure 
the advance. There were no overnight advances taken on October 31, 2022 and October 31, 2021. 

Assets pledged against liabilities and collateral assets held or re-pledged 

  

  

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Sources of pledged assets and collateral  
Bank assets  
Loans  
Securities  
Other assets  

Client assets (1)  

Collateral received and available for sale or re-pledging  
Less: not sold or re-pledged  

Uses of pledged assets and collateral  
Securities borrowing and lending  
Obligations related to securities sold short  
Obligations related to securities lent or sold under repurchase agreements  
Securitization  
Covered bonds  
Derivative transactions  
Foreign governments and central banks  
Clearing systems, payment systems and depositories  
Other  

As at

  

October 31  
2022  
  
  

October 31  
2021  
  
  
$  97,178   $ 79,282  
66,277  
25,981  

70,334  
40,318  

207,830  

171,540  

  
465,484  
(9,192)  

  
454,844  
(17,436)  

456,292  

437,408  

$ 664,122   $ 608,948  

  

  
$ 158,748   $ 154,699  
46,151  
263,005  
39,687  
46,699  
31,941  
7,314  
3,809  
15,643  

45,288  
274,392  
40,438  
62,905  
49,556  
9,503  
8,263  
15,029  

$ 664,122   $ 608,948  

(1) 

Primarily relates to Obligations related to securities lent or sold under repurchase agreements, Securities lent and Derivative transactions. 

Note 25  Legal and regulatory matters  

We are a large global institution that is subject to many different complex legal and regulatory requirements that continue to 
evolve. We are and have been subject to a variety of legal proceedings, including civil claims and lawsuits, regulatory 
examinations, investigations, audits and requests for information by various governmental regulatory agencies and law 
enforcement authorities in various jurisdictions. Some of these matters may involve novel legal theories and interpretations and 
may be advanced under criminal as well as civil statutes, and some proceedings could result in the imposition of civil, regulatory 
enforcement or criminal penalties. We review the status of all proceedings on an ongoing basis and will exercise judgment in 
resolving them in such manner as we believe to be in our best interest. In many proceedings, it is inherently difficult to determine 
whether any loss is probable or to reliably estimate the amount of any loss. This is an area of significant judgment and 
uncertainty and the extent of our financial and other exposure to these proceedings after taking into account current provisions 
could be material to our results of operations in any particular period. The following is a description of our significant legal 
proceedings. 

London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) litigation 
Royal Bank of Canada and other U.S. dollar panel banks have been named as defendants in private lawsuits filed in the U.S. with 
respect to the setting of U.S. dollar LIBOR including a number of class action lawsuits which have been consolidated before the 
U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York. The complaints in those private lawsuits assert claims against us and 
other panel banks under various U.S. laws, including U.S. antitrust laws, the U.S. Commodity Exchange Act, and state law. On 
December 30, 2021, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit issued an opinion affirming in part and reversing in part 
certain district court rulings that had dismissed a substantial portion of the consolidated class action on jurisdictional grounds 
and lack of standing. The Second Circuit remanded the matter to the district court for further proceedings consistent with its 
decision. 

Based on the facts currently known, it is not possible at this time for us to predict the ultimate outcome of these proceedings 

or the timing of their resolution. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

219 

Note 25  Legal and regulatory matters (continued)  

Royal Bank of Canada Trust Company (Bahamas) Limited proceedings 
On April 13, 2015, a French investigating judge notified Royal Bank of Canada Trust Company (Bahamas) Limited (RBC Bahamas) 
of the issuance of an ordonnance de renvoi referring RBC Bahamas and other unrelated persons to the French tribunal 
correctionnel to face the charge of complicity in estate tax fraud relating to actions taken relating to a trust for which RBC 
Bahamas serves as trustee. RBC Bahamas believes that its actions did not violate French law and contested the charge in the 
French court. On January 12, 2017, the French court acquitted all parties including RBC Bahamas and on June 29, 2018, the French 
appellate court affirmed the acquittals. The acquittals were appealed and on January 6, 2021, the French Supreme Court issued a 
judgment reversing the decision of the French Court of Appeal and sent the case back to the French Court of Appeal for 
rehearing. The Court of Appeal has scheduled a new trial to begin on September 18, 2023. 

On October 28, 2016, Royal Bank of Canada was granted an exemption by the U.S. Department of Labor that allows Royal 
Bank of Canada and its current and future affiliates to continue to qualify for the Qualified Professional Asset Manager (QPAM) 
exemption under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act despite any potential conviction of RBC Bahamas in the French 
proceeding for a temporary one year period from the date of conviction. In addition, the Department of Labor has proposed 
amendments to the QPAM exemption. If the amendments are finalized as proposed, it is unclear how they would affect Royal 
Bank of Canada’s ability to obtain relief beyond the one-year temporary exemption period. 

RBC Bahamas continues to review the trustee’s and the trust’s legal obligations, including liabilities and potential liabilities 

under applicable tax and other laws. Based on the facts currently known, it is not possible at this time to predict the ultimate 
outcome of these matters; however, we believe that the ultimate resolution will not have a material effect on our consolidated 
financial position, although it may be material to our results of operations in the period it occurs. 

Foreign exchange matters 
Beginning in 2015, putative class actions were brought against Royal Bank of Canada and/or RBC Capital Markets, LLC in the U.S., 
Canada, the United Kingdom and Brazil. These actions were each brought against multiple foreign exchange dealers and allege, 
among other things, collusive behaviour in global foreign exchange trading. In August 2018, the U.S. District Court entered a final 
order approving RBC Capital Markets, LLC’s pending settlement with class plaintiffs. In November 2018, certain institutional 
plaintiffs who had previously opted-out of participating in the settlement filed their own lawsuit in the U.S. District Court (the 
“Opt Out Action”). In May 2020, the U.S. District Court dismissed Royal Bank of Canada from the Opt Out Action. The plaintiffs 
refiled their claim and in July 2021, the U.S. District Court granted a motion in favour of RBC Capital Markets, LLC to dismiss the 
action, however, denied the motion as to Royal Bank of Canada. 

Royal Bank of Canada has reached a settlement for an immaterial amount with respect to a U.S. action brought by a different 

class of plaintiffs. The Canadian class actions have been settled. 

In its discretion Royal Bank of Canada may choose to resolve claims, litigations, or similar matters at any time. Based on the 

facts currently known, it is not possible at this time to predict the ultimate outcome of the Foreign Exchange Matters or the 
timing of their ultimate resolution. 

U.S. communications recordkeeping inquiry 
In October 2022, our subsidiary RBC Capital Markets, LLC received a request for information and documents from the Securities 
and Exchange Commission (SEC) concerning compliance with records preservation requirements relating to business 
communications exchanged on electronic channels that have not been approved by RBC Capital Markets, LLC. RBC Capital 
Markets, LLC is cooperating with the SEC’s inquiry. As has been publicly reported, the SEC is conducting similar inquiries into 
recordkeeping practices at multiple other financial institutions. 

Based on the facts currently known, it is not possible at this time to predict the ultimate outcome of this inquiry or the timing 

of its resolution. 

U.K. Competition and Markets Authority investigation 
RBC Europe Limited is engaging with the U.K. Competition and Markets Authority in respect of an investigation of alleged anti-
competitive arrangements in the financial services sector between 2009 and 2013. The outcome and resulting financial impact of 
this investigation is unknown and not reliably estimable. 

Other matters 
We are a defendant in a number of other actions alleging that certain of our practices and actions were improper. The lawsuits 
involve a variety of complex issues and the timing of their resolution is varied and uncertain. Management believes that we will 
ultimately be successful in resolving these lawsuits, to the extent that we are able to assess them, without material financial 
impact to the Bank. This is, however, an area of significant judgment and the potential liability resulting from these lawsuits 
could be material to our results of operations in any particular period. 

Various other legal proceedings are pending that challenge certain of our other practices or actions. While this is an area of 

significant judgment and some matters are currently inestimable, we consider that the aggregate liability, to the extent that we 
are able to assess it, resulting from these other proceedings will not be material to our consolidated financial position or results 
of operations. 

Note 26  Related party transactions  

Related parties 
Related parties include associated companies over which we have direct or indirect control or have significant influence and 
post-employment benefit plans for the benefit of our employees. Related parties also include key management personnel (KMP), 
the Board of Directors (Directors), close family members of KMP and Directors, and entities which are, directly or indirectly, 
controlled by or jointly controlled by KMP, Directors or their close family members. 

220

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Key management personnel and Directors 
KMP are defined as those persons having authority and responsibility for planning, directing and controlling our activities, 
directly or indirectly. They include the senior members of our organization called the Group Executive (GE). The GE is comprised 
of the President and Chief Executive Officer, and the Chief Officers and Group Heads, who report directly to him. The Directors do 
not plan, direct, or control the activities of the entity; they oversee the management of the business and provide stewardship. 

Compensation of Key management personnel and Directors 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Salaries and other short-term employee benefits (2)  
Post-employment benefits (3)  
Share-based payments  

For the year ended  

October 31  
2022 (1)  
$

October 31  
2021  
19  
3  
35  

57  

27   $
2  
40  

69   $

$

During the year ended October 31, 2022 certain executives, who were members of the Bank’s GE as at October 31, 2021, left the Bank and therefore were no longer part of 
KMP. Compensation for the year ended October 31, 2022 attributable to the former executives, including benefits and share-based payments relating to awards granted in 
prior years was $14 million. 
Includes the portion of the annual variable short-term incentive bonus that certain executives elected to receive in the form of DSUs. Refer to Note 21 for further details. 
Directors receive retainers but do not receive salaries and other short-term employee benefits. 

(3)  Directors do not receive post-employment benefits. 

Stock options, stock awards and shares held by Key management personnel, Directors and their close family members 

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except number of units)  
Stock options (3)  
Other non-option stock based awards (3)  
RBC common and preferred shares  

As at

  

October 31, 2022 (1)  

  

October 31, 2021 (2)  

No. of  

No. of  
units held  

units held   Value     
Value  
2,409,294   $ 59     2,369,659   $ 81  
127  
24  

914,496  
170,312  

983,004  
183,783  

115     
22     

3,494,102   $ 196      3,536,446   $ 232  

During the year ended October 31, 2022 certain executives, who were members of the Bank’s GE as at October 31, 2021, left the Bank and therefore were no longer part of 
KMP. Total shareholdings and options held upon their departure was 569,470 units with a value of $34 million. 

(2)  During the year ended October 31, 2021 certain directors, who were members of the Board of Directors as at October 31, 2020, retired. Total shareholdings held upon their 

retirement was 21,723 units with a value of $3 million. 

(3)  Directors do not receive stock options or any other non-option stock based awards. 

Transactions, arrangements and agreements involving Key management personnel, Directors and their close family 
members 
In the normal course of business, we provide certain banking services to KMP, Directors, and their close family members. These 
transactions were made on substantially the same terms, including interest rates and security, as for comparable transactions 
with persons of a similar standing and did not involve more than the normal risk of repayment or present other unfavourable 
features. 

As at October 31, 2022, total loans to KMP, Directors and their close family members were $14 million (October 31, 2021 – 

$14 million). We have no stage 3 allowance or provision for credit losses relating to these loans as at and for the years ended 
October 31, 2022 and October 31, 2021. No guarantees, pledges or commitments have been given to KMP, Directors or their close 
family members. 

Joint ventures and associates 
In the normal course of business, we provide certain banking and financial services to our joint ventures and associates, 
including loans, interest and non-interest bearing deposits. These transactions meet the definition of related party transactions 
and were made on substantially the same terms as for comparable transactions with third parties. 

As at October 31, 2022, loans to joint ventures and associates were $251 million (October 31, 2021 – $340 million) and deposits 

from joint ventures and associates were $20 million (October 31, 2021 – $13 million). We have no Stage 3 allowance or provision 
for credit losses relating to loans to joint ventures and associates as at and for the years ended October 31, 2022 and October 31, 
2021. $1 million of guarantees have been given to joint ventures and associates for the year ended October 31, 2022 (October 31, 
2021 – $1 million). 

Other transactions, arrangements or agreements involving joint ventures and associates 

  

  

  

  

(1) 

(2) 

  

(1) 

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Commitments and other contingencies  
Other fees received for services rendered  
Other fees paid for services received  

As at or for the year  
ended  

October 31  
October 31  
2021  
2022  
829   $ 1,017  
48  
108  

50  
107  

$

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

221 

Note 27  Results by business segment  

Composition of business segments 
For management purposes, based on the products and services offered, we are organized into five business segments: 
Personal & Commercial Banking, Wealth Management, Insurance, Investor & Treasury Services and Capital Markets. 

Personal & Commercial Banking provides a broad suite of financial products and services to individuals and businesses for their 
day-to-day banking, investing and financing needs through two businesses: Canadian Banking and Caribbean & U.S. Banking. In 
Canada, we provide a broad suite of financial products and services through our large branch network, automated teller 
machines, and mobile sales network. In the Caribbean and the U.S., we offer a broad range of financial products and services in 
targeted markets. Non-interest income in Personal & Commercial Banking mainly comprises Service charges, Mutual fund 
revenue and Card service revenue. 

Wealth Management serves high net worth and ultra-high net worth individual and institutional clients with a comprehensive 
suite of advice-based solutions and strategies to help them achieve their financial goals through our lines of businesses in 
Canada, the U.S., the U.K., Europe and Asia, including Canadian Wealth Management, U.S. Wealth Management (including City 
National), Global Asset Management, and International Wealth Management. Non-interest income in Wealth Management mainly 
comprises Investment management and custodial fees, Mutual fund revenue and Securities brokerage commissions. 

Insurance has operations in Canada and globally, operating under two business lines: Canadian Insurance and 
International Insurance, providing a wide range of advice and solutions for individual and business clients including life, health, 
wealth, home, auto, travel, annuities and reinsurance. In Canada, we offer our products and services through a wide variety of 
channels, comprised of mobile advisors, advice centres, RBC Insurance® stores, and digital platforms as well as through 
independent brokers and partners. Outside Canada, we operate in reinsurance and retrocession markets globally offering life, 
disability and longevity reinsurance products. Non-interest income in Insurance comprises Insurance premiums, investment and 
fee income. 

Investor & Treasury Services offers custody, fund administration, shareholder services, private capital services, middle office 
transaction banking (including trade finance, insourced solutions and services to broker dealers), and treasury and market 
services (including cash/liquidity management, foreign exchange and securities finance). Non-interest income in Investor & 
Treasury Services mainly comprises Investment management and custodial fees, and Foreign exchange revenue, other than 
trading. 

Capital Markets provides expertise in advisory & origination, sales & trading, and lending & financing to corporations, 
institutional clients, asset managers, private equity firms and governments globally in our two main business lines: Corporate & 
Investment Banking and Global Markets. In North America, we offer a full suite of products and services which include equity and 
debt origination and distribution, advisory services, and sales & trading. Outside North America, we have a targeted strategic 
presence in the U.K. & Europe, Australia, Asia & other markets aligned to our global expertise. In the U.K. & Europe, we offer a 
diversified set of capabilities in key industry sectors of focus. In Australia and Asia, we compete with global and regional 
investment banks in targeted areas aligned to our global expertise, including fixed income distribution and currencies trading, 
secured financing, as well as corporate and investment banking. Non-interest income in Capital Markets mainly includes Trading 
revenue, Underwriting and other advisory fees and Credit fees. 

All other enterprise level activities that are not allocated to these five business segments, such as certain treasury and liquidity 
management activities, including amounts associated with unattributed capital, and consolidation adjustments, including the 
elimination of the Taxable equivalent basis (Teb) gross-up amounts, are included in Corporate Support. Teb adjustments gross 
up income from certain tax-advantaged sources from Canadian taxable corporate dividends and U.S. tax credit investments 
recorded in Capital Markets to their effective tax equivalent value with the corresponding offset recorded in the provision for 
income taxes. Management believes that these Teb adjustments are necessary for Capital Markets to reflect how it is managed 
and enhances the comparability of revenue across our taxable and tax-advantaged sources. Our use of Teb adjustments may not 
be comparable to similarly adjusted amounts at other financial institutions. The Teb adjustment for the year ended October 31, 
2022 was $572 million (October 31, 2021 – $518 million). Gains (losses) on economic hedges of our U.S. Wealth Management 
(including City National) share-based compensation plans, which are reflected in revenue, and related variability in share-based 
compensation expense driven by changes in the fair value of liabilities relating to these plans are also included in Corporate 
Support as this presentation more closely aligns with how we view business performance and manage the underlying risks. 

Geographic segments 
For geographic reporting, our segments are grouped into Canada, the U.S. and Other International. Transactions are primarily 
recorded in the location that best reflects the risk due to negative changes in economic conditions and prospects for growth due 
to positive economic changes. This location frequently corresponds with the location of the legal entity through which the 
business is conducted and the location of our clients. Transactions are recorded in the local currency and are subject to foreign 
exchange rate fluctuations with respect to the movement in the Canadian dollar. 

Management reporting framework 
Our management reporting framework is intended to measure the performance of each business segment as if it were a stand-
alone business and reflects the way that the business segment is managed. This approach is intended to ensure that our 
business segments’ results include all applicable revenue and expenses associated with the conduct of their business and 
depicts how management views those results. We regularly monitor these segment results for the purpose of making decisions 
about resource allocation and performance assessment. These items do not impact our consolidated results. 

The expenses in each business segment may include costs or services directly incurred or provided on their behalf at the 

enterprise level. For other costs not directly attributable to one of our business segments, we use a management reporting 
framework that uses assumptions and methodologies for allocating overhead costs and indirect expenses to our business 

222

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

segments and that assists in the attribution of capital and the transfer pricing of funds to our business segments in a manner that 
consistently measures and aligns the economic costs with the underlying benefits and risks of that specific business segment. 
Activities and business conducted between our business segments are generally at market rates. All other enterprise level 
activities that are not allocated to our five business segments are reported under Corporate Support. 

Our assumptions and methodologies used in our management reporting framework are periodically reviewed by us to 

ensure that they remain valid. The capital attribution methodologies involve a number of assumptions that are revised 
periodically. 

For the year ended October 31, 2022  

Personal &  
Commercial  
Banking  

Investor &  
Treasury  
Services  

Wealth  

Management   Insurance  

Capital  
Markets (1)  

Corporate  
Support (1)  

Total  

Canada  

United  
States  

Other  
International  

$  14,019  $ 

3,634  $ 

–  $ 

498  $ 

6,124  

11,215  

3,510  

1,725  

(132)  $ 
(728)  

22,717   $  15,761   $  5,423   $ 
26,268  

13,508  

6,364  

20,143  
463  

14,849  
34  

3,510  
–  

2,223  
(3)  

48,985  
484  

29,269  
600  

11,787  
60  

4,698   $
4,422  

9,120  
(11)  

–  
8,437  

–  
10,701  

1,783  
588  

–  
1,569  

–  
5,561  

1,783  
26,609  

(466)  
13,648  

–  
9,006  

11,243  
2,873  

4,114  
970  

1,139  
282  

657  
144  

3,570  
649  

(614)  
(616)  

20,109  
4,302  

15,487  
3,615  

2,721  
452  

Net income  

8,370  $

3,144  $

857  $

513  $

2,921   $

2   $

15,807   $ 11,872   $ 2,269   $

1,666  

Total assets  

$ 602,824  $ 174,964  $ 21,918  $263,362  $ 794,032   $ 60,119   $1,917,219   $992,485   $570,255   $ 354,479  

942  $
11  

931  $
2  

190  $
1  

502   $
2  

2,634   $ 1,617   $

18  

11  

776   $
5  

equipment and intangibles  

$

394  $

2,265  $

49  $

84  $

256   $

630   $

3,678   $ 1,263   $

666   $

1,749  

Total liabilities  

$ 602,741  $ 174,986  $ 22,588  $263,206  $ 793,826   $ (48,303)  $1,809,044   $884,394   $570,266   $ 354,384  

(860)  
1  

–  
(247)  

  
12   $
–  

  

  

  

  

  

Personal &  
Commercial  
Banking  

Investor &  
Treasury  
Services  

Wealth  

Management   Insurance  

Capital  
Markets (1)  

Corporate  
Support (1)  

Total  

Canada  

United  
States  

Other  
International  

For the year ended October 31, 2021  

12,621  $
5,725  

18,346  
(187)  

2,689  $

10,607  

13,296  
(47)  

–  $

5,600  

5,600  
(1)  

460  $

1,704  

2,164  
(8)  

4,553   $
5,634  

10,187  
(509)  

(321)  $
421  

100  
(1)  

20,002   $ 13,947   $
29,691  

15,454  

4,447   $
8,083  

49,693  
(753)  

29,401  
(203)  

12,530  
(277)  

–  
7,978  

–  
9,929  

3,891  
596  

–  
1,589  

–  
5,427  

–  
405  

3,891  
25,924  

2,036  
12,897  

–  
9,107  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Net interest income (2)  
Non-interest income  

Total revenue  
Provision for credit losses  
Insurance policyholder benefits,  

claims and acquisition expense  

Non-interest expense  

Net income (loss) before income  

taxes  

Income taxes (recoveries)  

Non-interest expense includes:  

Depreciation and amortization  
Impairment of other intangibles  

Total assets include:  

Additions to premises and  

  

  
  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Net interest income (2)  
Non-interest income  

Total revenue  
Provision for credit losses  
Insurance policyholder benefits,  

claims and acquisition expense  

Non-interest expense  

Net income (loss) before income  

taxes  

Income taxes (recoveries)  

$

$

$

$

$

10,555  
2,708  

3,414  
788  

1,114  
225  

583  
143  

5,269  
1,082  

(304)  
(365)  

20,631  
4,581  

14,671  
3,599  

3,700  
649  

Net income  

7,847  $

2,626  $

889  $

440  $

4,187   $

61   $

16,050   $ 11,072   $

3,051   $

Non-interest expense includes:  

Depreciation and amortization  
Impairment of other intangibles  

923  $
5  

883  $
3  

197  $
2  

  
497   $
18  

  
4   $
–  

2,563   $
29  

1,594   $
16  

  
728   $
11  

Total assets  

$ 549,702  $

148,990  $ 22,724  $ 240,055  $ 692,278   $ 52,574   $ 1,706,323   $ 964,747   $ 454,949   $

286,627  

  

  

  

  

Total assets include:  

Additions to premises and  

equipment and intangibles  

$

503  $

752  $

48  $

80  $

355   $

459   $

2,197   $

1,238   $

739   $

220  

Total liabilities  

$ 549,619  $

149,096  $ 22,966  $ 239,960  $ 691,767   $ (45,847)  $ 1,607,561   $ 866,287   $ 454,903   $

286,371  

(1) 
(2) 

Taxable equivalent basis. 
Interest revenue is reported net of interest expense as we rely primarily on net interest income as a performance measure. 

Note 28 Nature and extent of risks arising from financial instruments  

We are exposed to credit, market and liquidity and funding risks as a result of holding financial instruments. Our risk 
measurement and objectives, policies and methodologies for managing these risks are disclosed in the shaded text along with 
those tables specifically marked with an asterisk (*) in the Credit risk section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis. These 
shaded text and tables are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements. 

Concentrations of credit risk exist if a number of our counterparties are engaged in similar activities, are located in the same 
geographic region or have comparable economic characteristics such that their ability to meet contractual obligations would be 
similarly affected by changes in economic, political or other conditions. 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  
57  $
2  

  

  

  
59  $
1  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

1,533  
6,396  

7,929  
(176)  

2,249  
3,955  

1,901  
235  

  
241  
2  

  

  

1,608  
6,154  

7,762  
(273)  

1,855  
3,920  

2,260  
333  

1,927  

  
241  
2  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

223 

Note 28 Nature and extent of risks arising from financial instruments (continued)  

Concentrations of credit risk indicate the relative sensitivity of our performance to developments affecting a particular 

industry or geographic location. The amounts of credit exposure associated with certain of our on- and off-balance sheet 
financial instruments are summarized in the following tables. 

Canada   %  

United  
States   %  

Europe   %  

Other  
International   %  

Total  

As at October 31, 2022  

$ 759,037   65%   $ 263,736   23%   $  87,671   8%   $

48,991   4%   $ 1,159,435  

32,434   20%  

35,921   23%  

72,885   46%  

17,439   11%  

158,679  

$ 791,471   60%   $ 299,657   23%   $ 160,556   12%   $

66,430   5%   $ 1,318,114  

(Millions of Canadian dollars,  
except percentage amounts)  
On-balance sheet assets other  

than derivatives (1)  

Derivatives before master  
netting agreements (2), (3)  

Off-balance sheet credit  

instruments (4)  

(Millions of Canadian dollars,  
except percentage amounts)  
On-balance sheet assets other  

Derivatives before master  
netting agreements (2), (3)  

Off-balance sheet credit  

instruments (4)  

  

  

  
  
  

  

  

Committed and uncommitted (5)   $ 398,719   57%   $ 223,624   32%   $
Other  

13,847   12%  

79,110   66%  

  

  

  

  

  

  
52,669   8%   $
24,476   20%  

  

  
20,857   3%   $
2,485   2%  

  
695,869  
119,918  

$ 477,829   59%   $ 237,471   29%   $

77,145   9%   $

23,342   3%   $

815,787  

Canada   %  

United  
States   %  

Europe   %  

Other  
International   %  

Total  

As at October 31, 2021  

than derivatives (1)  

$ 701,779   67%   $ 213,389   20%   $

85,271   8%   $

49,001   5%   $ 1,049,440  

19,927   21%  

23,910   25%  

45,717   47%  

7,111   7%  

96,665  

$ 721,706   63%   $ 237,299   21%   $ 130,988   11%   $

56,112   5%   $ 1,146,105  

Committed and uncommitted (5)   $ 370,479   59%   $ 196,692   32%   $
Other  

14,014   11%  

82,010   66%  

  

  

  

  

  

  
46,187   8%   $
26,920   22%  

  

  

9,335   1%   $
1,383   1%  

  
622,693  
124,327  

$ 452,489   61%   $ 210,706   28%   $

73,107   10%   $

10,718   1%   $

747,020  

(1) 

Includes Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowed, Loans and Customers’ liability under acceptances. The largest concentrations 
in Canada are Ontario at 56% (October 31, 2021 – 56%), the Prairies at 15% (October 31, 2021 – 16%), British Columbia and the territories at 15% (October 31, 2021 – 14%) and 
Quebec at 10% (October 31, 2021 – 10%). No industry accounts for more than 20% (October 31, 2021 – 20%) of total on-balance sheet credit instruments with the exception 
of Banking, which accounted for 26% (October 31, 2021 – 24%), and Government, which accounted for 32% (October 31, 2021 – 37%). The classification of our sectors aligns 
with our view of credit risk by industry. 
A further breakdown of our derivative exposures by risk rating and counterparty type is provided in Note 9. 
Excludes valuation adjustments determined on a pooled basis. 

(2) 
(3) 
(4)  Balances presented are contractual amounts representing our maximum exposure to credit risk. 
(5)  Represents our maximum exposure to credit risk. Retail and wholesale commitments respectively comprise 45% and 55% of our total commitments (October 31, 2021 – 
45% and 55%). The largest concentrations in the wholesale portfolio relate to Financial services at 15% (October 31, 2021 – 13%), Real estate and related at 12% 
(October 31, 2021 – 10%), Utilities at 11% (October 31, 2021 – 10%), Other services at 7% (October 31, 2021 – 8%), and Oil and gas at 6% (October 31, 2021 – 6%). The 
classification of our sectors aligns with our view of credit risk by industry.  

Note 29 Capital management  

Regulatory capital and capital ratios 
OSFI formally establishes risk-based capital and leverage minimums and Total Loss Absorbing Capacity (TLAC) ratios for deposit-
taking institutions in Canada. We are required to calculate our capital ratios using the Basel III framework. Under Basel III, 
regulatory capital includes Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1), Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital. CET1 capital mainly consists of common shares, 
retained earnings and other components of equity. Regulatory adjustments under Basel III include deductions of goodwill and 
other intangibles, certain deferred tax assets, defined benefit pension fund assets, investments in banking, financial and 
insurance entities, and the shortfall of provisions to expected losses. Tier 1 capital comprises predominantly CET1 and Additional 
Tier 1 items including non-cumulative preferred shares and LRCNs that meet certain criteria. Tier 2 capital includes subordinated 
debentures that meet certain criteria, certain loan loss allowances and non-controlling interests in subsidiaries’ Tier 2 
instruments. Total capital is the sum of Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital. External TLAC instruments comprise predominantly senior bail-in 
debt, which includes eligible senior unsecured debt with an original term to maturity of greater than 400 days and remaining term 
to maturity of greater than 365 days. TLAC available is defined as the sum of Total capital and other TLAC instruments. 

Regulatory capital ratios are calculated by dividing CET1, Tier 1 and Total capital by risk-weighted assets. The leverage ratio 
is calculated by dividing Tier 1 capital by an exposure measure. The exposure measure consists of total assets (excluding items 
deducted from Tier 1 capital) and certain off-balance sheet items converted into credit exposure equivalents. Adjustments are 
also made to derivatives and secured financing transactions to reflect credit and other risks. 

224

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

During 2022 and 2021, we complied with all applicable capital, leverage and TLAC requirements, including the domestic stability 
buffer, imposed by OSFI. 

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts and as otherwise noted)  
Capital (1)  

Risk-weighted assets (RWA) used in calculation of capital ratios (1)  

  

CET1 capital  
Tier 1 capital  
Total capital  

Credit risk  
Market risk  
Operational risk  

Total RWA  

Capital ratios and Leverage ratio (1)  

CET1 ratio  
Tier 1 capital ratio  
Total capital ratio  
Leverage ratio  
Leverage ratio exposure (billions)  

TLAC available and ratios (2), (3)  

TLAC available  
TLAC ratio  
TLAC leverage ratio  

As at   

October 31  
2022  
  

October 31  
2021  
  
76,945   $ 75,583  
82,246  
84,242  
92,026  
93,850  

$

  

  
$ 496,898   $ 444,142  
34,806  
73,593  

35,342  
77,639  

$ 609,879   $ 552,541  

  
12.6%  
13.8%  
15.4%  
4.4%  
1,898   $

$

  
$ 160,961  
26.4%  
8.5%  

  
13.7%  
14.9%  
16.7%  
4.9%  
1,662  

  
n.a.  
n.a.  
n.a.  

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

Capital, RWA, and capital ratios are calculated using OSFI’s Capital Adequacy Requirements (CAR) guideline and the Leverage ratio is calculated using OSFI’s Leverage 
Requirements (LR) guideline as updated in accordance with the regulatory guidance issued by OSFI in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Both the CAR guideline and LR 
guideline are based on the Basel III framework. 
Effective November 1, 2021, OSFI requires Domestic Systemically Important Banks (D-SIBs) to meet minimum risk-based TLAC ratio and TLAC leverage ratio requirements 
which are calculated using OSFI’s TLAC guideline. 
The TLAC standard is applied at the resolution entity level which for us is deemed to be Royal Bank of Canada and its subsidiaries. A resolution entity and its subsidiaries 
are collectively called a resolution group. Both the TLAC ratio and TLAC leverage ratio are calculated using the TLAC available as percentage of total RWA and leverage 
exposure, respectively. 

n.a.  not applicable 

Note 30 Offsetting financial assets and financial liabilities  

Offsetting within our Consolidated Balance Sheets may be achieved where financial assets and liabilities are subject to master 
netting arrangements that provide the currently enforceable right of offset and where there is an intention to settle on a net 
basis, or realize the assets and settle the liabilities simultaneously. For derivative contracts and repurchase and reverse 
repurchase arrangements, this is generally achieved when there is a market mechanism for settlement (e.g., central counterparty 
exchange or clearing house) which provides daily net settlement of cash flows arising from these contracts. Margin receivables 
and margin payables are generally offset as they settle simultaneously through a market settlement mechanism. 

Amounts that do not qualify for offsetting include master netting arrangements that only permit outstanding transactions 

with the same counterparty to be offset in an event of default or occurrence of other predetermined events. Such master netting 
arrangements include the International Swaps and Derivatives Association Master Agreement or certain derivative exchange or 
clearing counterparty agreements for derivative contracts, global master repurchase agreement and global master securities 
lending agreements for repurchase, reverse repurchase and other similar secured lending and borrowing arrangements. 

The amount of financial collateral received or pledged subject to master netting arrangements or similar agreements but do 

not qualify for offsetting refers to the collateral received or pledged to cover the net exposure between counterparties by 
enabling the collateral to be realized in an event of default or the occurrence of other predetermined events. Certain amounts of 
collateral are restricted from being sold or re-pledged unless there is an event of default or the occurrence of other 
predetermined events. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

225 

Note 30 Offsetting financial assets and financial liabilities (continued)  

The following tables provide the amount of financial instruments that have been offset on the Consolidated Balance Sheets 

and the amounts that do not qualify for offsetting but are subject to enforceable master netting arrangements or similar 
agreements. The amounts presented are not intended to represent our actual exposure to credit risk. 

Financial instruments subject to enforceable master netting arrangements or similar agreements 
  

As at October 31, 2022  

  

  

  

  

  

Amounts subject to enforceable netting arrangements  

  

Related amounts not  
offset on the Consolidated  
Balance Sheets (1)  

  

  

Gross amounts  
of recognized  
financial  
instruments  
  

Gross amounts  
offset on the  
Consolidated  
Balance Sheets  
  

Net amounts  
presented in the  
Consolidated  
Balance Sheets  
  

Impact of  
master  
netting  
agreements  
  

Financial  

collateral (2)   Net amounts  
  
  

  

  

  

  

Amounts not  
subject to  
enforceable  
netting  
arrangements  
  

Net amounts  
presented  
on the  
Consolidated  
Balance Sheets  
  

411,937   $
146,479  
1,638  
560,054   $

360,722   $
141,137  
825  
502,684   $

94,203   $
2,185  
304  
96,692   $

  

94,203   $
2,185  
304  
96,692   $

317,734   $
144,294  
1,334  
463,362   $

293   $ 314,602   $

98,610  
11  

21,412  
83  

98,914   $ 336,097   $

2,839   $

24,272  
1,240  
28,351   $

  

  

  

  

111   $

10,145  
–  

10,256   $

  

317,845  
154,439  
1,334  
473,618  
  

266,519   $
138,952  
521  
405,992   $

293   $ 265,822   $

98,610  
11  

19,758  
–  

98,914   $ 285,580   $

404   $

20,584  
510  
21,498   $

7,428   $

14,539  
–  

21,967   $

273,947  
153,491  
521  
427,959  

Amounts subject to enforceable netting arrangements  

  

As at October 31, 2021  

Related amounts not  
offset on the Consolidated  
Balance Sheets (1)  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Gross amounts  
of recognized  
financial  
instruments  
  

Gross amounts  
offset on the  
Consolidated  
Balance Sheets  
  

Net amounts  
presented in the  
Consolidated  
Balance Sheets  
  

Impact of  
master  
netting  
agreements  
  

Financial  

collateral (2)   Net amounts  
  

  

Amounts not  
subject to  
enforceable  
netting  
arrangements  
  

Net amounts  
presented  
on the  
Consolidated  
Balance Sheets  
  

384,439   $
84,595  
412  
469,446   $

  

338,737   $
77,514  
412  
416,663   $

77,028   $
314  
240  
77,582   $

  

77,028   $
314  
240  
77,582   $

307,411   $
84,281  
172  
391,864   $

101   $ 305,071   $

57,101  
1  

12,978  
61  

57,203   $ 318,110   $

  

  

  

2,239   $

14,202  
110  
16,551   $

  

261,709   $
77,200  
172  
339,081   $

101   $ 261,135   $

57,101  
1  

10,503  
–  

57,203   $ 271,638   $

473   $

9,596  
171  
10,240   $

492   $

11,260  
–  

11,752   $

  

492   $

14,239  
–  

14,731   $

307,903  
95,541  
172  
403,616  
  

262,201  
91,439  
172  
353,812  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Financial assets  
Assets purchased under reverse  
repurchase agreements and  
securities borrowed  

Derivative assets (3)  
Other financial assets  
  
Financial liabilities  
Obligations related to assets sold  
under repurchase agreements  
and securities loaned  
Derivative liabilities (3)  
Other financial liabilities  
  
  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  
Financial assets  
Assets purchased under reverse  
repurchase agreements and  
securities borrowed  

Derivative assets (3)  
Other financial assets  
  
Financial liabilities   
Obligations related to assets sold  
under repurchase agreements  
and securities loaned  
Derivative liabilities (3)  
Other financial liabilities  
  

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

Financial collateral is reflected at fair value. The amount of financial instruments and financial collateral disclosed is limited to the net balance sheet exposure, and any 
over-collateralization is excluded from the table. 
Includes cash collateral of $20 billion (October 31, 2021 – $12 billion) and non-cash collateral of $316 billion (October 31, 2021 – $307 billion) received for financial assets 
and cash collateral of $19 billion (October 31, 2021 – $9 billion) and non-cash collateral of $267 billion (October 31, 2021 – $262 billion) pledged for financial liabilities. 
Includes cash margin of $3 billion (October 31, 2021 – $3 billion) that was offset against derivative assets and cash margin of $8 billion (October 31, 2021 – $3 billion) that 
was offset against derivative liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. 

226

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Note 31 Recovery and settlement of on-balance sheet assets and liabilities  

The table below presents an analysis of assets and liabilities recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets by amounts to be 
recovered or settled within one year and after one year, as at the balance sheet date, based on contractual maturities and 
certain other assumptions outlined in the footnotes below. As warranted, we manage the liquidity risk of various products based 
on historical behavioural patterns that are often not aligned with contractual maturities. Amounts to be recovered or settled 
within one year, as presented below, may not be reflective of our long-term view of the liquidity profile of certain balance sheet 
categories. 

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Assets  
Cash and due from banks (1)  
Interest-bearing deposits with  

banks  
Securities  

Trading (2)  
Investment, net of applicable  

allowance  

Assets purchased under reverse  
repurchase agreements and  
securities borrowed  

Loans  

Retail  
Wholesale  
Allowance for loan losses  
Segregated fund net assets  
Other  

Customers’ liability under  

acceptances  
Derivatives (2)  
Premises and equipment  
Goodwill  
Other intangibles  
Other assets  

Liabilities  
Deposits (3)  
Segregated fund net liabilities  
Other  

Acceptances  
Obligations related to securities  

sold short  

Obligations related to assets sold  
under repurchase agreements  
and securities loaned  

Derivatives (2)  
Insurance claims and policy  

benefit liabilities  

Other liabilities  

Subordinated debentures  

  

(1) 
(2) 

Total  
  
113,846  

79,638  
  
139,240  

307,903  
  
503,598  
218,066  
(4,089)  
2,666  
  

19,798  
95,541  
7,424  
10,854  
4,471  
61,883  

Within one  
year  
  

October 31, 2022  
After one  
year  
  

As at   

  

Total    
    

Within one  
year  
  

October 31, 2021  

After one  
year  
  
922   $

$

71,081   $

1,316   $

72,397     $

112,924   $

108,011  
  
139,810  

–  
  
8,395  

108,011    
    
148,205    

79,638  
  
129,206  

–  
  
10,034  

26,540  

143,478  

170,018    

29,831  

115,653  

145,484  

316,714  
  
113,965  
70,374  
  
–  
  

17,827  
151,928  
59  
–  
–  
66,071  

1,131  
  
435,786  
203,593  
  
2,638  
  

  
2,511  
7,155  
12,277  
6,083  
14,229  

317,845    
    
549,751    
273,967    
(3,753)    
2,638    
    

17,827    
154,439    
7,214    
12,277    
6,083    
80,300    

307,805  
  
98,946  
60,099  
  
–  
  

19,793  
93,409  
28  
–  
–  
47,634  

98  
  
404,652  
157,967  
  
2,666  
  

5  
2,132  
7,396  
10,854  
4,471  
14,249  

  

  

    

  

$ 1,023,324   $

185,490   $ 1,208,814     $

943,633   $

–  
  
17,872  

2,638  
  
–  

2,638    
    
17,872    

–  
  
19,868  

  

157,198   $
2,666  
  
5  

  
1,100,831  
2,666  
  
19,873  

34,105  

1,406  

35,511    

35,524  

2,317  

37,841  

273,001  
140,808  

1,904  
71,689  
110  

946  
12,683  

9,607  
23,546  
9,915  

273,947    
153,491    

261,533  
89,804  

11,511    
95,235    
10,025    

1,867  
48,901  
188  

668  
1,635  

10,949  
21,400  
9,405  

262,201  
91,439  

12,816  
70,301  
9,593  

$ 1,562,813   $

246,231   $ 1,809,044     $ 1,401,318   $

206,243   $

1,607,561  

Cash and due from banks are assumed to be recovered within one year, except for cash balances not available for use by the Bank. 
Trading securities classified as FVTPL and trading derivatives are presented as within one year as this best represents in most instances the short-term nature of our 
trading activities. Trading securities designated as FVTPL are generally presented based on contractual maturity. Non-trading derivatives are presented according to the 
recovery or settlement of the hedging transaction. 

(3)  Demand deposits of $562 billion (October 31, 2021 – $576 billion) are presented as within one year due to their being repayable on demand or at short notice on a 

contractual basis. In practice, these deposits relate to a broad range of individuals and customer-types which form a stable base for our operations and liquidity needs. 

  

$ 1,082,380   $

838,592   $ 1,917,219     $

979,313   $

731,099   $

1,706,323  

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

227 

Note 32 Parent company information  

The following table presents information regarding the legal entity of Royal Bank of Canada with its subsidiaries presented on an 
equity accounted basis. 

Condensed Balance Sheets 

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Assets  
Cash and due from banks  
Interest-bearing deposits with banks  
Securities  
Investments in bank subsidiaries and associated corporations (1)  
Investments in other subsidiaries and associated corporations  
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowed  
Loans, net of allowance for loan losses  
Net balances due from bank subsidiaries (1)  
Other assets  

Liabilities and shareholders’ equity  
Deposits  
Net balances due to bank subsidiaries (1)  
Net balances due to other subsidiaries  
Other liabilities  

Subordinated debentures  
Shareholders’ equity  

(1) 

Bank refers primarily to regulated deposit-taking institutions and securities firms. 

Condensed Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income 

  

  

  

  

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Interest and dividend income (1)  
Interest expense  

Net interest income  
Non-interest income (2)  

Total revenue  

Provision for credit losses  
Non-interest expense  

Income before income taxes  
Income taxes  

Net income before equity in undistributed income of subsidiaries  
Equity in undistributed income of subsidiaries  

Net income  

Other comprehensive income (loss), net of taxes  

Total comprehensive income  

(1) 
(2) 

Includes dividend income from investments in subsidiaries and associated corporations of $11 million (October 31, 2021 – $5 million). 
Includes a nominal share of profit (loss) from associated corporations (October 31, 2021 – nominal). 

As at   

October 31  
2022  

  

48,062   $
84,680  
174,615  
49,841  
88,260  
132,829  
679,580  
7,172  
227,767  

October 31  
2021  

  
97,617  
56,896  
153,780  
43,546  
80,216  
125,590  
601,742  
–  
155,421  

  
854,833  
28,201  
38,309  
285,447  

$ 1,492,806   $

1,314,808  

  

$

955,978   $

–  
36,701  
382,099  

1,374,778  

1,206,790  

9,964  
108,064  

9,351  
98,667  

$ 1,492,806   $

1,314,808  

For the year ended  

October 31  
2022  
27,791   $
12,846  

14,945  
5,425  

20,370  

579  
10,175  

9,616  
2,276  

7,340  
8,454  

15,794   $

5,810  

21,604   $

October 31  
2021  

19,793  
5,615  

14,178  
5,393  

19,571  

(606)  
9,466  

10,711  
2,088  

8,623  
7,415  

16,038  

1,463  

17,501  

$ 

$

$

$

228

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Consolidated Financial Statements 

Condensed Statements of Cash Flows 

  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Cash flows from operating activities  

Net income  
Adjustments to determine net cash from operating activities:  

Change in undistributed earnings of subsidiaries  
Change in deposits, net of securitizations  
Change in loans, net of securitizations  
Change in trading securities  
Change in obligations related to assets sold under repurchase agreements and  

securities loaned  

Change in assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowed  
Change in obligations related to securities sold short  
Other operating activities, net  

Net cash from (used in) operating activities  

Cash flows from investing activities  

Change in interest-bearing deposits with banks  
Proceeds from sales and maturities of investment securities  
Purchases of investment securities  
Net acquisitions of premises and equipment and other intangibles  
Change in cash invested in subsidiaries  
Change in net funding provided to subsidiaries  

Net cash from (used in) investing activities  

Cash flows from financing activities  

Issuance of subordinated debentures  
Repayment of subordinated debentures  
Issue of common shares, net of issuance costs  
Common shares purchased for cancellation  
Issue of preferred shares and other equity instruments, net of issuance costs  
Redemption of preferred shares and other equity instruments  
Dividends paid on shares and distributions paid on other equity instruments  
Repayment of lease liabilities  

Net cash from (used in) financing activities  

Net change in cash and due from banks  
Cash and due from banks at beginning of year  

Cash and due from banks at end of year  

Supplemental disclosure of cash flow information  

Amount of interest paid  
Amount of interest received  
Amount of dividends received  
Amount of income taxes paid  

Note 33 Subsequent events  

For the year ended  

$

15,794   $

October 31  
2022  

  

  
(8,454)  
101,145  
(78,288)  
(10,348)  

24,133  
(7,239)  
3,024  
2,385  

42,152  

  
(27,784)  
59,304  
(71,509)  
(1,180)  
(2,514)  
(36,981)  

(80,664)  

  
1,000  
–  
51  
(5,426)  
749  
(155)  
(6,960)  
(302)  

(11,043)  

(49,555)  
97,617  

48,062   $

  

7,801   $

21,332  
2,618  
4,641  

$

$

October 31  
2021  

  
16,038  
  
(7,415)  
72,196  
(46,194)  
(8,756)  

5,228  
8,447  
2,405  
6,316  

48,265  

  
(35,293)  
70,260  
(73,150)  
(1,093)  
(3,078)  
(12,068)  

(54,422)  

  
2,750  
(2,500)  
90  
–  
2,245  
(1,475)  
(6,420)  
(313)  

(5,623)  

(11,780)  
109,397  

97,617  

  
6,306  
17,831  
2,185  
1,772  

Acquisition 
On November 29, 2022, we entered into an agreement to acquire 100% of the common shares of HSBC Bank Canada (HSBC 
Canada) for an all-cash purchase price of $13.5 billion. In addition, we will purchase all of the existing preferred shares and 
subordinated debt of HSBC Canada held directly or indirectly by HSBC Holdings plc at par value ($2.1 billion as of September 30, 
2022). HSBC Canada is a premier Canadian personal and commercial bank focused on globally connected clients. 

The transaction is expected to close by late 2023 and is subject to the satisfaction of customary closing conditions, including 

regulatory approvals. The results of the acquired business will be consolidated from the date of close. 

Consolidated Financial Statements

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

229 

2013  
  
15,550  
9,039  
182,710  

117,517  
408,850  
126,079  

2013  
13,249  
17,433  
30,682  
1,237  

2,784  
16,214  
8,342  

  

2013  
  
5.53  
5.49  
19.7%  
2.67%  
52.8%  
  

Ten-year statistical review  

Condensed Balance Sheets 

(Millions of Canadian dollars) (1)  
Assets  
Cash and due from banks  
Interest-bearing deposits with banks  
Securities, net of applicable allowance (2)  
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase  

agreements and securities borrowed  

Loans, net of allowance  
Other  

Total assets  

Liabilities  
Deposits (3)  
Other (3)  
Subordinated debentures  

Total liabilities  

Non-controlling interest  

Total equity  

$

$

$
$

Condensed Income Statements  

(Millions of Canadian dollars) (1)  
Net interest income (3)  
Non-interest income (3), (4)  
Total revenue (4)  
Provision for credit losses (5)  
Insurance policyholder benefits, claims and  

acquisition expense  
Non-interest expense (4)  
Net income   

Other Statistics – reported  

(Millions of Canadian dollars, except  
percentages and per share amounts) (1)  
PROFITABILITY MEASURES  

Earnings per shares – basic  

– diluted  

Return on common equity (6), (7)  
Return on risk-weighted assets  
Efficiency ratio (4)  

KEY RATIOS  

PCL on impaired loans as a % of average  

net loans and acceptances (8)  

Net interest margin  

(average earning assets, net) (3), (6)  

SHARE INFORMATION  

Common shares outstanding (000s)  

– end of period  

Dividends declared per common share  
Dividend yield (9)  
Dividend payout ratio  
Book value per share (10)  
Common share price (RY on TSX) (11)  
Market capitalization (TSX) (11)  
Market price to book value  

CAPITAL MEASURES – CONSOLIDATED  
Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio  
Tier 1 capital ratio  
Total capital ratio  
Leverage ratio  

2022  
  

2021  
  

2020  
  

2019  
  

2018  
  

2017  
  

2016  
  

2015  
  

2014  
  

$ 

72,397   $ 113,846   $ 118,888   $

108,011  
318,223  

79,638  
284,724  

39,013  
275,814  

26,310   $
38,345  
249,004  

30,209   $
36,471  
222,866  

28,407   $
32,662  
218,379  

14,929   $
27,851  
236,093  

12,452   $
22,690  
215,508  

17,421   $
8,399  
199,148  

317,845  
819,965  
280,778  

307,903  
717,575  
202,637  

313,015  
660,992  
216,826  

306,961  
618,856  
189,459  

294,602  
576,818  
173,768  

220,977  
542,617  
169,811  

186,302  
521,604  
193,479  

174,723  
472,223  
176,612  

135,580  
435,229  
144,773  

$1,917,219   $1,706,323   $1,624,548   $1,428,935   $1,334,734   $1,212,853   $1,180,258   $1,074,208   $ 940,550   $ 859,745  

  

  
  
$1,208,814   $1,100,831   $1,011,885   $ 886,005   $ 836,197   $ 789,036   $ 757,589   $ 697,227   $ 614,100   $ 563,079  
239,763  
7,443  

264,088  
7,859  

305,675  
7,362  

341,295  
9,762  

340,124  
9,265  

409,451  
9,131  

449,490  
9,815  

516,029  
9,867  

497,137  
9,593  

590,205  
10,025  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

$1,809,044   $1,607,561   $1,537,781   $1,345,310   $1,254,779   $1,138,425   $1,108,646   $1,010,264   $ 886,047   $ 810,285  

Equity attributable to shareholders  

108,064  

98,667  

86,664  

83,523  

79,861  

73,829  

71,017  

62,146  

52,690  

47,665  

111  

95  

103  

102  

94  

599  

595  

1,798  

1,813  

1,795  

108,175  

98,762  

86,767  

83,625  

79,955  

74,428  

71,612  

63,944  

54,503  

49,460  

Total liabilities and equity  

$1,917,219   $1,706,323   $1,624,548   $1,428,935   $1,334,734   $1,212,853   $1,180,258   $1,074,208   $ 940,550   $ 859,745  

2022  
22,717   $
26,268  
48,985  
484  

2021  
20,002   $
29,691  
49,693  
(753)  

2020  
20,835   $
26,346  
47,181  
4,351  

2019  
19,749   $
26,253  
46,002  
1,864  

2018  
17,952   $
24,624  
42,576  
1,307  

2017  
16,926   $
23,743  
40,669  
1,150  

2016  
16,531   $
22,264  
38,795  
1,546  

2015  
14,771   $
20,932  
35,703  
1,097  

2014  
14,116   $
19,992  
34,108  
1,164  

1,783  
26,609  
15,807   $

3,891  
25,924  
16,050   $

3,683  
24,758  
11,437   $

4,085  
24,139  
12,871   $

2,676  
22,833  
12,431   $

3,053  
21,794  
11,469   $

3,424  
20,526  
10,458   $

2,963  
19,020  
10,026   $

3,573  
17,661  

9,004   $

2022  
  

11.08   $
11.06   $
16.4%  
2.68%  
54.3%  
  

0.10%  

1.48%  
  

2021  
  

11.08   $
11.06   $
18.6%  
2.90%  
52.2%  
  

2020  
  
7.84   $
7.82   $

14.2%  
2.10%  
52.5%  
  

2019  
  
8.78   $
8.75   $

16.8%  
2.52%  
52.5%  
  

2018  
  
8.39   $
8.36   $

17.6%  
2.55%  
53.6%  
  

2017  
  
7.59   $
7.56   $

17.0%  
2.49%  
53.6%  
  

2016  
  
6.80   $
6.78   $

16.3%  
2.34%  
52.9%  
  

2015  
  
6.75   $
6.73   $

18.6%  
2.45%  
53.3%  
  

2014  
  
6.03   $
6.00   $

19.0%  
2.52%  
51.8%  
  

0.10%  

0.24%  

0.27%  

0.20%  

0.21%  

0.28%  

0.24%  

0.27%  

0.31%  

1.48%  
  

1.55%  
  

1.61%  
  

1.64%  
  

1.69%  
  

1.70%  
  

1.71%  
  

1.86%  
  

1.88%  
  

1,382,911  

1,424,525  

1,422,473  

1,430,096  

1,438,794  

1,452,535  

1,484,235  

1,443,955  

1,443,125  

$

$
$ 

4.96   $
3.7%  
45%  
72.85   $
126.05   $

4.32   $
3.8%  
39%  

64.57   $ 
128.82   $ 

4.29   $
4.7%  
55%  
56.75   $
93.16   $

4.07   $
4.1%  
46%  
54.41   $
106.24   $

3.77   $
3.7%  
45%  
51.12   $
95.92   $

3.48   $
3.8%  
46%  
46.41   $
100.87   $

3.24   $
4.3%  
48%  
43.32   $
83.80   $

3.08   $
4.1%  
46%  
39.51   $
74.77   $

2.84   $
3.8%  
47%  
33.69   $
80.01   $

174,316  
1.73  
  
12.6%  
13.8%  
15.4%  
4.4%  

183,507  
2.00  
  
13.7%  
14.9%  
16.7%  
4.9%  

132,518  
1.64  
  
12.5%  
13.5%  
15.5%  
4.8%  

151,933  
1.95  
  
12.1%  
13.2%  
15.2%  
4.3%  

138,009  
1.88  
  
11.5%  
12.8%  
14.6%  
4.4%  

146,554  
2.17  
  
10.9%  
12.3%  
14.2%  
4.4%  

124,476  
1.93  
  
10.8%  
12.3%  
14.4%  
4.4%  

107,925  
1.89  
  
10.6%  
12.2%  
14.0%  
4.3%  

115,393  
2.38  
  
9.9%  
11.4%  
13.4%  
n.a.  

1,441,722  
2.53  
4.0%  
46%  
29.87  
70.02  
100,903  
2.34  
  
9.6%  
11.7%  
14.0%  
n.a.  

(1) 

(2) 

(4) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8) 

Effective November 1, 2019, we adopted IFRS 16 Leases. Results from periods prior to November 1, 2019 are reported in accordance with IAS 17 Leases in this 2022 Annual 
Report. Effective November 1, 2018, we adopted IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Results from periods prior to November 1, 2018 are reported in 
accordance with IAS 18 Revenue in this 2022 Annual Report. Effective November 1, 2017, we adopted IFRS 9 Financial Instruments (IFRS 9). Results from periods prior to 
November 1, 2017 are reported in accordance with IAS 39 Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement (IAS 39) in this 2022 Annual Report. 
Securities are comprised of trading and investment securities. Under IFRS 9, investment securities represent debt and equity securities at FVOCI and debt securities at 
amortized cost, net of the applicable allowance. Under IAS 39, investment securities represented available-for-sale securities and held-to-maturity securities. 

(3)  Commencing Q4 2019, the interest component and the accrued interest payable recorded on certain deposits carried at FVTPL previously presented in trading revenue 

and deposits, respectively are presented in net interest income and other liabilities respectively. As at November 1, 2016, comparative amounts have been reclassified to 
conform with this presentation. 
Effective Q4 2017, service fees and other costs incurred in association with certain commissions and fees earned are presented on a gross basis in non-interest expense. 
As at November 1, 2014, comparative amounts have been reclassified to conform with this presentation. 

(5)  Under IFRS 9, PCL relates primarily to loans, acceptances, and commitments, and also applies to all financial assets except for those classified or designated as FVTPL 

and equity securities designated as FVOCI. Prior to the adoption of IFRS 9, PCL related only to loans, acceptances, and commitments. PCL on loans, acceptances, and 
commitments is comprised of PCL on impaired loans (Stage 3 PCL under IFRS 9 and PCL on impaired loans under IAS 39) and PCL on performing loans (Stage 1 and 
Stage 2 PCL under IFRS 9 and PCL on loans not yet identified as impaired under IAS 39). 
Average amounts are calculated using methods intended to approximate the average of the daily balances for the period. This includes Average common equity used in 
the calculation of ROE. For further details, refer to the Key performance and non-GAAP measures section of the MD&A. 
This measure may not have a standardized meaning under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and may not be comparable to similar measures disclosed 
by other financial institutions. For further details, refer to the Key performance and non-GAAP measures section of the MD&A. 
PCL on impaired loans represents Stage 3 PCL under IFRS 9 and PCL on impaired loans under IAS 39. Stage 3 PCL under IFRS 9 is comprised of lifetime credit losses of 
credit-impaired loans, acceptances and commitments. 

(9)  Defined as dividends per common share divided by the average of the high and low share price in the relevant period. 
(10)  Calculated as common equity divided by the number of common shares outstanding at the end of the period. 
(11)  Based on TSX closing market price at period-end. 
n.a.  not applicable 

230

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Ten-year statistical review 

Principal subsidiaries  

(Millions of Canadian dollars)  

Principal subsidiaries (1)  

Royal Bank Holding Inc.  

RBC Direct Investing Inc.  
RBC Insurance Holdings Inc.  

RBC Life Insurance Company  

R.B.C. Holdings (Bahamas) Limited  

RBC Caribbean Investments Limited  
Royal Bank of Canada Insurance  

Company Ltd.  

Investment Holdings (Cayman) Limited  
RBC (Barbados) Funding Ltd.  

Capital Funding Alberta Limited  

RBC Global Asset Management Inc.  

RBC Investor Services Trust  
RBC Investor Services Bank S.A.  
RBC (Barbados) Trading Bank Corporation  

RBC U.S. Group Holdings LLC (2)  

RBC USA Holdco Corporation (2)  
RBC Capital Markets, LLC (2)  
City National Bank  

RBC Dominion Securities Limited  

RBC Dominion Securities Inc.  

RBC Europe Limited  

The Royal Trust Company  

   As at October 31, 2022  

Carrying value of  
voting shares owned  
by the Bank (3)  

Principal office address (2)  

Toronto, Ontario, Canada  
Toronto, Ontario, Canada  
Mississauga, Ontario, Canada  
Mississauga, Ontario, Canada  
Nassau, New Providence, Bahamas  
George Town, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands  

$

Camana Bay, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands  
George Town, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands  
St. Michael, Barbados  
Calgary, Alberta, Canada  
Toronto, Ontario, Canada  
Toronto, Ontario, Canada  
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg  
St. James, Barbados  

Toronto, Ontario, Canada  
New York, New York, U.S.  
New York, New York, U.S.  
Los Angeles, California, U.S.  

Toronto, Ontario, Canada  
Toronto, Ontario, Canada  

London, England  

Montreal, Quebec, Canada  

77,914  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

27,655  
  
  
  

13,535  
  

5,604  

2,669  

1,215  

486  

Royal Bank Mortgage Corporation  

Toronto, Ontario, Canada  

Royal Trust Corporation of Canada  

Toronto, Ontario, Canada  

(1) 
(2) 

(3) 

The Bank directly or indirectly controls each subsidiary. 
Each subsidiary is incorporated or organized under the laws of the state or country in which the principal office is situated, except for RBC U.S. Group Holdings LLC and 
RBC USA Holdco Corporation which are incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware, U.S. and RBC Capital Markets, LLC, which is organized under the laws of the 
State of Minnesota, U.S. 
The carrying value of voting shares is stated as the Bank’s equity in such investments. 

Principal subsidiaries

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

231 

Valuation day price  
For Canadian income tax purposes,  
Royal Bank of Canada’s common  
stock was quoted at $29.52 per share  
on the Valuation Day (December 22,  
1971). This is equivalent to $7.38 per  
share after adjusting for the  
two-for-one stock split of March 1981  
and the two-for- one stock split of  
February 1990. The one-for-one stock  
dividends in October 2000 and  
April 2006 did not affect the  
Valuation Day amount for our  
common shares.  

Shareholder contacts  
For dividend information, change  
in share registration or address,  
lost stock certificates, tax forms,  
estate transfers or dividend  
reinvestment, please contact:  
Computershare Trust Company  
of Canada  
100 University Avenue, 8th Floor  
Toronto, Ontario M5J 2Y1  
Canada  

Tel: 1-866-586-7635 (Canada and  
the U.S.) or 514-982-7555  
(International)  
Fax: 1-888-453-0330 (Canada and  
the U.S.) or 416-263-9394  
(International)  
email: service@computershare.com  

Financial analysts, portfolio  
managers, institutional  
investors  
For financial information inquiries,  
please contact:   
Investor Relations  
Royal Bank of Canada  
200 Bay Street  
South Tower  
Toronto, Ontario M5J 2J5  
Canada  
Tel: 416-955-7808  
email: invesrel@rbc.com  
or visit our website at  
rbc.com/investorrelations  

Shareholder Information  

Corporate headquarters  
Street address:  
Royal Bank of Canada  
200 Bay Street  
Toronto, Ontario M5J 2J5  
Canada  
Tel: 1-888-212-5533  

Mailing address:  
P.O. Box 1  
Royal Bank Plaza  
Toronto, Ontario M5J 2J5  
Canada  
website: rbc.com  

Transfer Agent and Registrar  
Main Agent:  
Computershare Trust Company  
of Canada  
1500 Robert-Bourassa Blvd.  
Suite 700  
Montreal, Quebec H3A 3S8  
Canada  
Tel: 1-866-586-7635 (Canada and  
the U.S.) or 514-982-7555  
(International)  
Fax: 514-982-7580  
website: computershare.com/rbc  

Co-Transfer Agent (U.S.):  
Computershare Trust  
Company, N.A.  
250 Royall Street  
Canton, Massachusetts 02021  
U.S.A.  

Co-Transfer Agent (U.K.):  
Computershare Investor  
Services PLC  
Securities Services – Registrars  
P.O. Box 82, The Pavilions,  
Bridgwater Road,  
Bristol BS99 6ZZ  
U.K.  

Stock exchange listings  
(Symbol: RY)  

Common shares are listed on:  
Canada – Toronto Stock  
Exchange (TSX)  
U.S. – New York Stock Exchange  
(NYSE)  
Switzerland – Swiss Exchange  
(SIX)  

Preferred shares AZ, BB, BD, BF,  
BH, BI and BO are listed on the  
TSX. The related depository  
shares of the series C-2 preferred  
shares are listed on the NYSE.  

Direct deposit service  
Shareholders in Canada and the  
U.S. may have their common  
share dividends deposited  
directly to their bank account by  
electronic funds transfer. To  
arrange for this service, please  
contact our Transfer Agent and  
Registrar, Computershare Trust  
Company of Canada.  

Eligible dividend designation  
For purposes of the Income Tax  
Act (Canada) and any  
corresponding provincial and  
territorial tax legislation, all  
dividends (and deemed  
dividends) paid by RBC to  
Canadian residents on both its  
common and preferred shares,  
are designated as “eligible  
dividends”, unless stated  
otherwise.  

Common share repurchases  
We are engaged in a normal  
course issuer bid (NCIB) which  
allows us to repurchase for  
cancellation up to 45 million  
common shares during the  
period spanning from December  
8, 2021 to December 7, 2022,  
when the bid expires, or such  
earlier date as we may  
complete the purchases  
pursuant to our Notice of  
Intention to Make a NCIB filed  
with the Toronto Stock  
Exchange.  

We determine the amount and  
timing of purchases under the  
NCIB, subject to prior  
consultation with the Office of  
the Superintendent of  
Financial Institutions. For  
further details, refer to the  
Capital management section.  

A copy of our Notice of Intention  
to Make a NCIB may be  
obtained, without charge, by  
contacting our Corporate  
Secretary at our Toronto  
mailing address.  

2023 Quarterly earnings  
release dates  
First quarter  
March 1  
Second quarter   May 25  
Third quarter  
Fourth quarter   November 30  

August 24  

2023 Annual Meeting  
The Annual Meeting of Common  
Shareholders will be held on  
Wednesday, April 5, 2023.  

  

Record  
dates  
January 26  
April 25  
July 26  
October 26  

January 27  
April 28  
July 28  
October 27  

Payment  
dates  
February 24  
May 24  
August 24  
November 24  

February 7  
May 8  
August 8  
November 7  

February 15  
August 17  

February 24  
August 24  

Dividend dates for 2023  
Subject to approval by the Board of Directors  

  
Common and preferred shares series  

  

AZ, BB, BD, BF, BH, BI and BO  

Preferred shares series C-2  
(US$)  

Preferred shares series BT  

Governance  
Summaries of the significant ways in which corporate governance  
practices followed by RBC differ from corporate governance practices  
required to be followed by U.S. domestic companies under the NYSE  
listing standards are available on our website at rbc.com/governance.  

Information contained in or otherwise accessible through the websites mentioned in this report to shareholders does not form a part of this report. All references 
to websites are inactive textual references and are for your information only. 

Trademarks used in this report include the LION & GLOBE Symbol, ROYAL BANK OF CANADA, RBC, RBC CAPITAL MARKETS, RBC FUTURE LAUNCH, RBC GLOBAL 
ASSET MANAGEMENT, RBC INSURANCE, RBC HOMELINE PLAN, RBC PAYEDGE, RBC TECH FOR NATURE, RBC VANTAGE, RBC WEALTH MANAGEMENT, RBCx, 
MYADVISOR, InvestEase, AIDEN, OWNR, NOMI, NOMI INSIGHTS, NOMI FIND & SAVE Dr. Bill, MYDOH, Avion Rewards, RBCxMUSIC, AVION, and VANTAGE SNAPSHOT 
which are trademarks of Royal Bank of Canada used by Royal Bank of Canada and/or by its subsidiaries under license. All other trademarks mentioned in this 
report which are not the property of Royal Bank of Canada, are owned by their respective holders. 

232

Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2022

Shareholder information 

rbc.com/ar2022

81104 (12/2022)

